All wisdom is from God, and is given to them that fear and love God.

1:1. All wisdom is from the Lord God, and hath been always with him, and
is before all time.

1:2. Who hath numbered the sand of the sea, and the drops of rain, and
the days of the world? Who hath measured the height of heaven, and the
breadth of the earth, and the depth of the abyss?

1:3. Who hath searched out the wisdom of God that goeth before all
things?

1:4. Wisdom hath been created before all things, and the understanding
of prudence from everlasting.

1:5. The word of God on high is the fountain of wisdom, and her ways are
everlasting commandments.

1:6. To whom hath the root of wisdom been revealed, and who hath known
her wise counsels?

1:7. To whom hath the discipline of wisdom been revealed and made
manifest? and who hath understood the multiplicity of her steps?

1:8. There is one most high Creator Almighty, and a powerful king, and
greatly to be feared, who sitteth upon his throne, and is the God of
dominion.

1:9. He created her in the Holy Ghost, and saw her, and numbered her,
and measured her.

1:10. And he poured her out upon all his works, and upon all flesh
according to his gift, and hath given her to them that love him.

1:11. The fear of the Lord is honour, and glory, and gladness, and a
crown of joy.

1:12. The fear of the Lord shall delight the heart, and shall give joy,
and gladness, and length of days.

1:13. With him that feareth the Lord, it shall go well in the latter
end, and in the day of his death he shall be blessed.

1:14. The love of God is honourable wisdom.

1:15. And they to whom she shall shew herself love her by the sight, and
by the knowledge of her great works.

1:16. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and was created
with the faithful in the womb, it walketh with chosen women, and is
known with the just and faithful.

1:17. The fear of the Lord is the religiousness of knowledge.

1:18. Religiousness shall keep and justify the heart, it shall give joy
and gladness.

1:19. It shall go well with him that feareth the Lord, and in the days
of his end he shall be blessed.

1:20. To fear God is the fulness of wisdom, and fulness is from the
fruits thereof.

1:21. She shall fill all her house with her increase, and the
storehouses with her treasures.

1:22. The fear of the Lord is a crown of wisdom, filling up peace and
the fruit of salvation:

1:23. And it hath seen, and numbered her: but both are the gifts of God.

1:24. Wisdom shall distribute knowledge, and understanding of prudence:
and exalteth the glory of them that hold her.

1:25. The root of wisdom is to fear the Lord: and the branches thereof
are long-lived.

1:26. In the treasures of wisdom is understanding, and religiousness of
knowledge: but to sinners wisdom is an abomination.

1:27. The fear of the Lord driveth out sin:

1:28. For he that is without fear, cannot be justified: for the wrath of
his high spirits is his ruin.

1:29. A patient man shall bear for a time, and afterwards joy shall be
restored to him.

1:30. A good understanding will hide his words for a time, and the lips
of many shall declare his wisdom.

1:31. In the treasures of wisdom is the signification of discipline:

1:32. But the worship of God is an abomination to a sinner.

1:33. Son, if thou desire wisdom, keep justice, and God will give her to
thee.

1:34. For the fear of the Lord is wisdom and discipline: and that which
is agreeable to him,

1:35. Is faith, and meekness: and he will fill up his treasures.

1:36. Be not incredulous to the fear of the Lord: and come not to him
with a double heart.

1:37. Be not a hypocrite in the sight of men, and let not thy lips be a
stumblingblock to thee.

1:38. Watch over them, lest thou fall, and bring dishonour upon thy
soul,

1:39. And God discover thy secrets, and cast thee down in the midst of
the congregation.

1:40. Because thou camest to the Lord wickedly, and thy heart is full of
guile and deceit.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 2

God's servants must look for temptations: and must arm themselves with
patience and confidence in God.

2:1. Son, when thou comest to the service of God, stand in justice and
in fear, and prepare thy soul for temptation.

2:2. Humble thy heart, and endure: incline thy ear, and receive the
words of understanding: and make not haste in the time of clouds.

2:3. Wait on God with patience: join thyself to God, and endure, that
thy life may be increased in the latter end.

2:4. Take all that shall be brought upon thee: and in thy sorrow endure,
and in thy humiliation keep patience.

2:5. For gold and silver are tried in the fire, but acceptable men in
the furnace of humiliation.

2:6. Believe God, and he will recover thee: and direct thy way, and
trust in him. Keep his fear, and grow old therein.

2:7. Ye that fear the Lord, wait for his mercy: and go not aside from
him lest ye fall.

2:8. Ye that fear the Lord, believe him: and your reward shall not be
made void.

2:9. Ye that fear the Lord hope in him, and mercy shall come to you for
your delight.

2:10. Ye that fear the Lord, love him, and your hearts shall be
enlightened.

2:11. My children behold the generations of men: and know ye that no one
hath hoped in the Lord, and hath been confounded.

2:12. For who hath continued in his commandment, and hath been forsaken?
or who hath called upon him, and he despised him?

2:13. For God is compassionate and merciful, and will forgive sins in
the day of tribulation: and he is a protector to all that seek him in
truth.

2:14. Woe to them that are of a double heart and to wicked lips, and to
the hands that do evil, and to the sinner that goeth on the earth two
ways.

2:15. Woe to them that are fainthearted, who believe not God: and
therefore they shall not be protected by him.

2:16. Woe to them that have lost patience, and that have forsaken the
right ways, and have gone aside into crooked ways.

2:17. And what will they do, when the Lord shall begin to examine?

2:18. They that fear the Lord, will not be incredulous to his word: and
they that love him, will keep his way.

2:19. They that fear the Lord, will seek after the things that are well
pleasing to him: and they that love him, shall be filled with his law.

2:20. They that fear the Lord, will prepare their hearts, and in his
sight will sanctify their souls,

2:21. They that fear the Lord, keep his commandments, and will have
patience even until his visitation,

2:22. Saying: If we do not penance, we shall fall into the hands of the
Lord, and not into the hands of men.

2:23. For according to his greatness, so also is his mercy with him.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 3

Lessons concerning the honour of parents, and humility, and avoiding
curiosity.

3:1. The sons of wisdom are the church of the just: and their
generation, obedience and love.

3:2. Children, hear the judgment of your father, and so do that you may
be saved.

3:3. For God hath made the father honourable to the children: and
seeking the judgment of the mothers, hath confirmed it upon the
children.

3:4. He that loveth God, shall obtain pardon for his sins by prayer, and
shall refrain himself from them, and shall be heard in the prayer of
days.

3:5. And he that honoureth his mother is as one that layeth up a
treasure.

3:6. He that honoureth his father shall have joy in his own children,
and in the day of his prayer he shall be heard.

3:7. He that honoureth his father shall enjoy a long life: and he that
obeyeth the father, shall be a comfort to his mother.

3:8. He that feareth the Lord, honoureth his parents, and will serve
them as his masters that brought him into the world.

3:9. Honour thy father, in work and word, and all patience,

3:10. That a blessing may come upon thee from him, and his blessing may
remain in the latter end.

3:11. The father's blessing establisheth the houses of the children: but
the mother's curse rooteth up the foundation.

3:12. Glory not in the dishonour of thy father: for his shame is no
glory to thee.

3:13. For the glory of a man is from the honour of his father, and a
father without honour is the disgrace of the son.

3:14. Son, support the old age of thy father, and grieve him not in his
life;

3:15. And if his understanding fail, have patience with him, and despise
him not when thou art in thy strength: for the relieving of the father
shall not be forgotten.

3:16. For good shall be repaid to thee for the sin of thy mother.

3:17. And in justice thou shalt be built up, and in the day of
affliction thou shalt be remembered: and thy sins shall melt away as the
ice in the fair warm weather.

3:18. Of what an evil fame is he that forsaketh his father: and he is
cursed of God that angereth his mother.

3:19. My son, do thy works in meekness, and thou shalt be beloved above
the glory of men.

3:20. The greater thou art, the more humble thyself in all things, and
thou shalt find grace before God:

3:21. For great is the power of God alone, and he is honoured by the
humble.

3:22. Seek not the things that are too high for thee, and search not
into things above thy ability: but the things that God hath commanded
thee, think on them always, and in many of his works be not curious.

3:23. For it is not necessary for thee to see with thy eyes those things
that are hid.

3:24. In unnecessary matters be not over curious, and in many of his
works thou shalt not be inquisitive.

3:25. For many things are shewn to thee above the understanding of men.

3:26. And the suspicion of them hath deceived many, and hath detained
their minds in vanity.

3:27. A hard heart shall fear evil at the last: and he that loveth
danger shall perish in it.

3:28. A heart that goeth two ways shall not have success, and the
perverse of heart shall be scandalized therein.

3:29. A wicked heart shall be laden with sorrows, and the sinner will
add sin to sin.

3:30. The congregation of the proud shall not be healed: for the plant
of wickedness shall take root in them, and it shall not be perceived.

3:31. The heart of the wise is understood in wisdom, and a good ear will
hear wisdom with all desire.

3:32. A wise heart, and which hath understanding, will abstain from
sins, and in the works of justice shall have success.

3:33. Water quencheth a flaming fire, and alms resisteth sins:

3:34. And God provideth for him that sheweth favour: he remembereth him
afterwards, and in the time of his fall he shall find a sure stay.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 4

An exhortation to works of mercy, and to the love of wisdom.

4:1. Son, defraud not the poor of alms, and turn not away thy eyes from
the poor.

4:2. Despise not the hungry soul: and provoke not the poor in his want.

4:3. Afflict not the heart of the needy, and defer not to gibe to him
that is in distress.

4:4. Reject not the petition of the afflicted: and turn not away thy
face from the needy.

4:5. Turn not away thy eyes from the poor for fear of anger: and leave
not to them that ask of thee to curse thee behind thy back.

4:6. For the prayer of him that curseth thee in the bitterness of his
soul, shall be heard, for he that made him will hear him.

4:7. Make thyself affable to the congregation of the poor, and humble
thy soul to the ancient, and bow thy head to a great man.

4:8. Bow down thy ear cheerfully to the poor, and pay what thou owest,
and answer him peaceable words with mildness.

4:9. Deliver him that suffereth wrong out of the hand of the proud: and
be not fainthearted in thy soul.

4:10. In judging be merciful to the fatherless as a father, and as a
husband to their mother.

4:11. And thou shalt be as the obedient son of the most High, and he
will have mercy on thee more than a mother.

4:12. Wisdom inspireth life into her children, and protecteth them that
seek after her, and will go before them in the way of justice.

4:13. And he that loveth her, loveth life: and they that watch for her,
shall embrace her sweetness.

4:14. They that hold her fast, shall inherit life: and whithersoever she
entereth, God will give a blessing.

4:15. They that serve her, shall be servants to the holy one: and God
loveth them that love her.

4:16. He that hearkeneth to her, shall judge nations: and he that
looketh upon her, shall remain secure.

4:17. If he trust to her, he shall inherit her, and his generation shall
be in assurance.

4:18. For she walketh with him in temptation, and at the first she
chooseth him.

In temptation, etc... The meaning is, that before wisdom will choose any
for her favourite, she will try them by leading them through
contradictions, afflictions, and temptations, the usual noviceship of
the children of God.

4:19. She will bring upon him fear and dread and trial: and she will
scourge him with the affliction of her discipline, till she try him by
her laws, and trust his soul.

4:20. Then she will strengthen him, and make a straight way to him, and
give him joy,

4:21. And will disclose her secrets to him, and will heap upon him
treasures of knowledge and understanding of justice.

4:22. But if he go astray, she will forsake him, and deliver him into
the hands of his enemy.

4:23. Son, observe the time, and fly from evil.

4:24. For thy soul be not ashamed to say the truth.

4:25. For there is a shame that bringeth sin, and there is a shame that
bringeth glory and grace.

4:26. Accept no person against thy own person, nor against thy soul a
lie.

4:27. Reverence not thy neighbour in his fall:

4:28. And refrain not to speak in the time of salvation. Hide not thy
wisdom in her beauty.

4:29. For by the tongue wisdom is discerned: and understanding, and
knowledge, and learning by the word of the wise, and steadfastness in
the works of justice.

4:30. In nowise speak against the truth, but be ashamed of the lie of
thy ignorance.

4:31. Be not ashamed to confess thy sins, but submit not thyself to
every man for sin.

4:32. Resist not against the face of the mighty, and do not strive
against the stream of the river.

4:33. Strive for justice for thy soul, and even unto death fight for
justice, and God will overthrow thy enemies for thee.

4:34. Be not hasty in thy tongue: and slack and remiss in thy works.

4:35. Be not as a lion in thy house, terrifying them of thy household,
and oppressing them that are under thee.

4:36. Let not thy hand be stretched out to receive, and shut when thou
shouldst give.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 5

We must not presume of our wealth or strength: nor of the mercy of God,
to go on in sin: we must be steadfast in virtue and truth.

5:1. Set not thy heart upon unjust possessions, and say not: I have
enough to live on: for it shall be of no service in the time of
vengeance and darkness.

5:2. Follow not in thy strength the desires of thy heart:

5:3. And say not: How mighty am I? and who shall bring me under for my
deeds? for God will surely take revenge.

5:4. Say not: I have sinned, and what harm hath befallen me? for the
most High is a patient rewarder.

5:5. Be not without fear about sin forgiven, and add not sin upon sin:

5:6. And say not: The mercy of the Lord is great, he will have mercy on
the multitude of my sins.

5:7. For mercy and wrath quickly come from him, and his wrath looketh
upon sinners.

5:8. Delay not to be converted to the Lord, and defer it not from day to
day.

5:9. For his wrath shall come on a sudden, and in the time of vengeance
he will destroy thee.

5:10. Be not anxious for goods unjustly gotten: for they shall not
profit thee in the day of calamity and revenge.

5:11. Winnow not with every wind, and go not into every way: for so is
every sinner proved by a double tongue.

5:12. Be steadfast in the way of the Lord, and in the truth of thy
judgment, and in knowledge, and let the word of peace and justice keep
with thee.

5:13. Be meek to hear the word, that thou mayst understand: and return a
true answer with wisdom.

5:14. If thou have understanding, answer thy neighbour: but if not, let
thy hand be upon thy mouth, lest thou be surprised in an unskilful word,
and be confounded.

5:15. Honour and glory is in the word of the wise, but the tongue of the
fool is his ruin.

5:16. Be not called a whisperer, and be not taken in thy tongue, and
confounded.

5:17. For confusion and repentance is upon a thief, and an evil mark of
disgrace upon the double tongued, but to the whisperer hatred, and
enmity, and reproach.

5:18. Justify alike the small and the great.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 6

Of true and false friends: and of the of the fruits of wisdom.

6:1. Instead of a friend become not an enemy to thy neighbour: for an
evil man shall inherit reproach and shame, so shall every sinner that is
envious and double tongued.

6:2. Extol not thyself in the thoughts of thy soul like a bull: lest thy
strength be quashed by folly,

6:3. And it eat up thy leaves, and destroy thy fruit, and thou be left
as a dry tree in the wilderness.

6:4. For a wicked soul shall destroy him that hath it, and maketh him to
be a joy to his enemies, and shall lead him into the lot of the wicked.

6:5. A sweet word multiplieth friends, and appeaseth enemies, and a
gracious tongue in a good man aboundeth.

6:6. Be in peace with many, but let one of a thousand be thy counsellor.

6:7. If thou wouldst get a friend, try him before thou takest him, and
do not credit him easily.

6:8. For there is a friend for his own occasion, and he will not abide
in the day of thy trouble.

6:9. And there is a friend that turneth to enmity; and there is a friend
that will disclose hatred and strife and reproaches.

6:10. And there is a friend a companion at the table, and he will not
abide in the day of distress.

6:11. A friend if he continue steadfast, shall be to thee as thyself,
and shall act with confidence among them of thy household.

6:12. If he humble himself before thee, and hide himself from thy face,
thou shalt have unanimous friendship for good.

6:13. Separate thyself from thy enemies, and take heed of thy friends.

6:14. A faithful friend is a strong defence: and he that hath found him,
hath found a treasure.

6:15. Nothing can be compared to a faithful friend, and no weight of
gold and silver is able to countervail the goodness of his fidelity.

6:16. A faithful friend is the medicine of life and immortality: and
they that fear the Lord, shall find him.

6:17. He that feareth God, shall likewise have good friendship: because
according to him shall his friend be.

6:18. My son, from thy youth up receive instruction, and even to thy
grey hairs thou shalt find wisdom.

6:19. Come to her as one that plougheth, and soweth, and wait for her
good fruits:

6:20. For in working about her thou shalt labour a little, and shalt
quickly eat of her fruits.

6:21. How very unpleasant is wisdom to the unlearned, and the unwise
will not continue with her.

6:22. She shall be to them as a mighty stone of trial, and they will
cast her from them before it be long.

6:23. For the wisdom of doctrine is according to her name, and she is
not manifest unto many, but with them to whom she is known, she
continueth even to the sight of God.

6:24. Give ear, my son, and take wise counsel, and cast not away my
advice.

6:25. Put thy feet into her fetters, and thy neck into her chains:

6:26. Bow down thy shoulder, and bear her, and be not grieved with her
bands.

6:27. Come to her with all thy mind, and keep her ways with all thy
power.

6:28. Search for her, and she shall be made known to thee, and when thou
hast gotten her, let her not go:

6:29. For in the latter end thou shalt find rest in her, and she shall
be turned to thy joy.

6:30. Then shall her fetters be a strong defence for thee, and a firm
foundation, and her chain a robe of glory:

6:31. For in her is the beauty of life, and her bands are a healthful
binding.

6:32. Thou shalt put her on as a robe of glory, and thou shalt set her
upon thee as a crown of joy.

6:33. My son, if thou wilt attend to me, thou shalt learn: and if thou
wilt apply thy mind, thou shalt be wise.

6:34. If thou wilt incline thy ear, thou shalt receive instruction: and
if thou love to hear, thou shalt be wise.

6:35. Stand in the multitude of ancients that are wise, and join thyself
from thy heart to their wisdom, that thou mayst hear every discourse of
God, and the sayings of praise may not escape thee.

6:36. And if thou see a man of understanding, go to him early in the
morning, and let thy foot wear the steps of his doors.

6:37. Let thy thoughts be upon the precepts of God, and meditate
continually on his commandments: and he will give thee a heart, and the
desire of wisdom shall be given to thee.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 7

Religious and moral duties.

7:1. Do no evils, and no evils shall lay hold of thee.

7:2. Depart from the unjust, and evils shall depart from thee.

7:3. My son, sow not evils in the furrows of injustice, and thou shalt
not reap them sevenfold.

7:4. Seek not of the Lord a preeminence, nor of the king the seat of
honour.

7:5. Justify not thyself before God, for he knoweth the heart: and
desire not to appear wise before the king.

7:6. Seek not to be made a judge, unless thou have strength enough to
extirpate iniquities: lest thou fear the person of the powerful, and lay
a stumblingblock for thy integrity.

7:7. Offend not against the multitude of a city, neither cast thyself in
upon the people,

7:8. Nor bind sin to sin: for even in one thou shalt not be unpunished.

7:9. Be not fainthearted in thy mind:

7:10. Neglect not to pray, and to give alms.

7:11. Say not: God will have respect to the multitude of my gifts, and
when I offer to the most high God, he will accept my offerings.

7:12. Laugh no man to scorn in the bitterness of his soul: for there is
one that humbleth and exalteth, God who seeth all.

7:13. Devise not a lie against thy brother: neither do the like against
thy friend.

7:14. Be not willing to make any manner of lie: for the custom thereof
is not good.

7:15. Be not full of words in a multitude of ancients, and repeat not
the word in thy prayer.

Repeat not, etc... Make not much babbling by repetition of words: but
aim more at fervour of heart.

7:16. Hate not laborious works, nor husbandry ordained by the most High.

7:17. Number not thyself among the multitude of the disorderly.

7:18. Remember wrath, for it will not tarry long.

7:19. Humble thy spirit very much: for the vengeance on the flesh of the
ungodly is fire and worms.

7:20. Do not transgress against thy friend deferring money, nor despise
thy dear brother for the sake of gold.

7:21. Depart not from a wise and good wife, whom thou hast gotten in the
fear of the Lord: for the grace of her modesty is above gold.

7:22. Hurt not the servant that worketh faithfully, nor the hired man
that giveth thee his life.

7:23. Let a wise servant be dear to thee as thy own soul, defraud him
not of liberty, nor leave him needy.

7:24. Hast thou cattle? have an eye to them: and if they be for thy
profit, keep them with thee.

7:25. Hast thou children? instruct them, and bow down their neck from
their childhood.

7:26. Hast thou daughters? have a care of their body, and shew not thy
countenance gay towards them.

7:27. Marry thy daughter well, and thou shalt do a great work, and give
her to a wise man.

7:28. If thou hast a wife according to thy soul, cast her not off: and
to her that is hateful, trust not thyself. With thy whole heart,

7:29. Honour thy father, and forget not the groanings of thy mother:

7:30. Remember that thou hadst not been born but through them: and make
a return to them as they have done for thee.

7:31. With all thy soul fear the Lord, and reverence his priests.

7:32. With all thy strength love him that made thee: and forsake not his
ministers.

7:33. Honour God with all thy soul and give honour to the priests, and
purify thyself with thy arms.

Thy arms... That is, with all thy power: or else by arms (brachiis) are
here signified the right shoulders of the victims, which by the law fell
to the priests. See ver. 35.

7:34. Give them their portion, as it is commanded thee, of the
firstfruits and of purifications: and for thy negligences purify thyself
with a few.

7:35. Offer to the Lord the gift of thy shoulders, and the sacrifice of
sanctification, and the firstfruits of the holy things:

7:36. And stretch out thy hand to the poor, that thy expiation and thy
blessing may be perfected.

7:37. A gift hath grace in the sight of all the living, and restrain not
grace from the dead.

And restrain not grace from the dead... That is, withhold not from them
the benefit of alms, prayers, and sacrifices. Such was the doctrine and
practice of the church of God even in the time of the Old Testament. And
the same has always been continued from the days of the apostles in the
church of the New Testament.

7:38. Be not wanting in comforting them that weep, and walk with them
that mourn.

7:39. Be not slow to visit the sick: for by these things thou shalt be
confirmed in love.

7:40. In all thy works remember thy last end, and thou shalt never sin.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 8

Other lessons of wisdom and virtue.

8:1. Strive not with a powerful man, lest thou fall into his hands.

8:2. Contend not with a rich man, lest he bring an action against thee.

8:3. For gold and silver hath destroyed many, and hath reached even to
the heart of kings, and perverted them.

8:4. Strive not with a man that is full of tongue, and heap not wood
upon his fire.

8:5. Communicate not with an ignorant man, lest he speak ill of thy
family.

8:6. Despise not a man that turneth away from sin, nor reproach him
therewith: remember that we are all worthy of reproof.

8:7. Despise not a man in his old age; for we also shall become old.

8:8. Rejoice not at the death of thy enemy; knowing that we all die, and
are not willing that others should rejoice at our death.

8:9. Despise not the discourse of them that are ancient and wise, but
acquaint thyself with their proverbs.

8:10. For of them thou shalt learn wisdom, and instruction of
understanding, and to serve great men without blame.

8:11. Let not the discourse of the ancients escape thee, for they have
learned of their fathers:

8:12. For of them thou shalt learn understanding, and to give an answer
in time of need.

8:13. Kindle not the coals of sinners by rebuking them, lest thou be
burnt with the flame of the fire of their sins.

8:14. Stand not against the face of an injurious person, lest he sit as
a spy to entrap thee in thy words.

8:15. Lend not to a man that is mightier than thyself: and if thou
lendest, count it as lost.

8:16. Be not surety above thy power: and if thou be surety, think as if
thou wert to pay it.

8:17. Judge not against a judge: for he judgeth according to that which
is just.

8:18. Go not on the way with a bold man, lest he burden thee with his
evils: for he goeth according to his own will, and thou shalt perish
together with his folly.

8:19. Quarrel not with a passionate man, and go not into the desert with
a bold man: for blood is as nothing in his sight, and where there is no
help he will overthrow thee.

8:20. Advise not with fools, for they cannot love but such things as
please them.

8:21. Before a stranger do no matter of counsel: for thou knowest not
what he will bring forth.

8:22. Open not thy heart to every man: lest he repay thee with an evil
turn, and speak reproachfully to thee.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 9

Cautions with regard to women, and dangerous conversations.

9:1. Be not jealous over the wife of thy bosom, lest she shew in thy
regard the malice of a wicked lesson.

9:2. Give not the power of thy soul to a woman, lest she enter upon thy
strength, and thou be confounded.

9:3. Look not upon a woman that hath a mind for many: lest thou fall
into her snares.

9:4. Use not much the company of her that is a dancer, and hearken not
to her, lest thou perish by the force of her charms.

9:5. Gaze not upon a maiden, lest her beauty be a stumblingblock to
thee.

9:6. Give not thy soul to harlots in any point: lest thou destroy
thyself and thy inheritance.

9:7. Look not round about thee in the ways of the city, nor wander up
and down in the streets thereof.

9:8. Turn away thy face from a woman dressed up, and gaze not about upon
another's beauty.

9:9. For many have perished by the beauty of a woman, and hereby lust is
enkindled as a fire.

9:10. Every woman that is a harlot, shall be trodden upon as dung in the
way.

9:11. Many by admiring the beauty of another man's wife, have become
reprobate, for her conversation burneth as fire.

9:12. Sit not at all with another man's wife, nor repose upon the bed
with her:

9:13. And strive not with her over wine, lest thy heart decline towards
her and by thy blood thou fall into destruction.

9:14. Forsake not an old friend, for the new will not be like to him.

9:15. A new friend is as new wine: it shall grow old, and thou shalt
drink it with pleasure.

9:16. Envy not the glory and riches of a sinner: for thou knowest not
what his ruin shall be.

9:17. Be not pleased with the wrong done by the unjust, knowing that
even to hell the wicked shall not please.

9:18. Keep thee far from the man that hath power to kill, so thou shalt
not suspect the fear of death.

9:19. And if thou come to him, commit no fault, lest he take away thy
life.

9:20. Know it to be a communication with death: for thou art going in
the midst of snares, and walking upon the arms of them that are grieved.

9:21. According to thy power beware of thy neighbour, and treat with the
wise and prudent.

9:22. Let just men be thy guests, and let thy glory be in the fear of
God.

9:23. And let the thought of God be in thy mind, and all thy discourse
on the commandments of the Highest.

9:24. Works shall be praised for the hand of the artificers, and the
prince of the people for the wisdom of his speech, but the word of the
ancients for the sense.

9:25. A man full of tongue is terrible in his city, and he that is rash
in his word shall be hateful.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 10

The virtues and vices of men in power: the great evil of pride.

10:1. A wise judge shall judge his people, and the government of a
prudent man shall be steady.

Judge his people... In the Greek it is, instruct his people.

10:2. As the judge of the people is himself, so also are his ministers:
and what manner of man the ruler of a city is, such also are they that
dwell therein.

10:3. An unwise king shall be the ruin of his people: and cities shall
be inhabited through the prudence of the rulers.

10:4. The power of the earth is in the hand of God, and in his time he
will raise up a profitable ruler over it.

10:5. The prosperity of man is in the hand of God, and upon the person
of the scribe he shall lay his honour.

The scribe... That is, the man that is wise and learned in the law.

10:6. Remember not any injury done thee by thy neighbour, and do thou
nothing by deeds of injury.

10:7. Pride is hateful before God and men: and all iniquity of nations
is execrable.

10:8. A kingdom is translated from one people to another, because of
injustices, and wrongs, and injuries, and divers deceits.

10:9. But nothing is more wicked than the covetous man. Why is earth,
and ashes proud?

10:10. There is not a more wicked thing than to love money: for such a
one setteth even his own soul to sale: because while he liveth he hath
cast away his bowels.

10:11. All power is of short life. A long sickness is troublesome to the
physician.

10:12. The physician cutteth off a short sickness: so also a king is to
day, and to morrow he shall die.

10:13. For when a man shall die, he shall inherit serpents, and beasts,
and worms.

10:14. The beginning of the pride of man, is to fall off from God:

10:15. Because his heart is departed from him that made him: for pride
is the beginning of all sin: he that holdeth it, shall be filled with
maledictions, and it shall ruin him in the end.

10:16. Therefore hath the Lord disgraced the assemblies of the wicked,
and hath utterly destroyed them.

10:17. God hath overturned the thrones of proud princes, and hath set up
the meek in their stead.

10:18. God hath made the roots of proud nations to wither, and hath
planted the humble of these nations.

10:19. The Lord hath overthrown the lands of the Gentiles, and hath
destroyed them even to the foundation.

10:20. He hath made some of them to wither away, and hath destroyed
them, and hath made the memory of them to cease from the earth.

10:21. God hath abolished the memory of the proud, and hath preserved
the memory of them that are humble in mind.

10:22. Pride was not made for men: nor wrath for the race of women.

10:23. That seed of men shall be honoured, which feareth God: but that
seed shall be dishonoured, which transgresseth the commandments of the
Lord.

10:24. In the midst of brethren their chief is honourable: so shall they
that fear the Lord, be in his eyes.

10:25. The fear of God is the glory of the rich, and of the honourable,
and of the poor.

10:26. Despise not a just man that is poor, and do not magnify a sinful
man that is rich.

10:27. The great man, and the judge, and the mighty is in honour: and
there is none greater than he that feareth God.

10:28. They that are free shall serve a servant that is wise: and a man
that is prudent and well instructed will not murmur when he is reproved;
and he that is ignorant, shall not be honoured.

10:29. Extol not thyself in doing thy work, and linger not in the time
of distress;

10:30. Better is he that laboureth, and aboundeth in all things, than he
that boasteth himself and wanteth bread.

10:31. My son, keep thy soul in meekness, and give it honour according
to its desert.

10:32. Who will justify him that sinneth against his own soul? and who
will honour him that dishonoureth his own soul?

10:33. The poor man is glorified by his discipline and fear, and there
is a man that is honoured for his wealth.

10:34. But he that is glorified in poverty, how much more in wealth? and
he that is glorified in wealth, let him fear poverty.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 11

Lessons of humility and moderation in all things.

11:1. The wisdom of the humble shall exalt his head, and shall make him
sit in the midst of great men.

11:2. Praise not a man for his beauty, neither despise a man for his
look.

11:3. The bee is small among flying things but her fruit hath the
chiefest sweetness.

11:4. Glory not in apparel at any time, and be not exalted in the day of
thy honour: for the works of the Highest only are wonderful, and his
works are glorious, and secret, and hidden.

11:5. Many tyrants have sat on the throne, and he whom no man would
think on, hath worn the crown.

11:6. Many mighty men have been greatly brought down, and the glorious
have been delivered into the hand of others.

11:7. Before thou inquire, blame no man: and when thou hast inquired,
reprove justly.

11:8. Before thou hear, answer not a word: and interrupt not others in
the midst of their discourse.

11:9. Strive not in a matter which doth not concern thee, and sit not in
judgment with sinners.

11:10. My son, meddle not with many matters: and if thou be rich, thou
shalt not be free from sin: for if thou pursue after thou shalt not
overtake; and if thou run before thou shalt not escape.

11:11. There is an ungodly man that laboureth, and maketh haste, and is
in sorrow, and is so much the more in want.

11:12. Again, there is an inactive man that wanteth help, is very weak
in ability, and full of poverty:

11:13. Yet the eye of God hath looked upon him for good, and hath lifted
him up from his low estate, and hath exalted his head: and many have
wondered at him, and have glorified God.

11:14. Good things and evil, life and death, poverty and riches, are
from God.

11:15. Wisdom and discipline, and the knowledge of the law are with God.
Love and the ways of good things are with him.

11:16. Error and darkness are created with sinners: and they that glory
in evil things, grow old in evil.

11:17. The gift of God abideth with the just, and his advancement shall
have success for ever.

11:18. There is one that is enriched by living sparingly, and this is
the portion of his reward.

11:19. In that he saith: I have found me rest, and now I will eat of my
goods alone:

11:20. And he knoweth not what time shall pass, and that death
approacheth, and that he must leave all to others, and shall die.

11:21. Be steadfast in thy covenant, and be conversant therein, and grow
old in the work of thy commandments.

11:22. Abide not in the works of sinners. But trust in God, and stay in
thy place,

11:23. For it is easy in the eyes of God on a sudden to make the poor
man rich.

11:24. The blessing of God maketh haste to reward the just, and in a
swift hour his blessing beareth fruit.

11:25. Say not: What need I, and what good shall I have by this?

11:26. Say not: I am sufficient for myself: and what shall I be made
worse by this?

11:27. In the day of good things be not unmindful of evils: and in the
day of evils be not unmindful of good things:

11:28. For it is easy before God in the day of death to reward every one
according to his ways.

11:29. The affliction of an hour maketh one forget great delights, and
in the end of a man is the disclosing of his works.

11:30. Praise not any man before death, for a man is known by his
children.

11:31. Bring not every man into thy house: for many are the snares of
the deceitful.

11:32. For as corrupted bowels send forth stinking breath, and as the
partridge is brought into the cage, and as the roe into the snare: so
also is the heart of the proud, and as a spy that looketh on the fall of
his neighbour.

11:33. For he lieth in wait and turneth good into evil, and on the elect
he will lay a blot.

11:34. Of one spark cometh a great fire, and of one deceitful man much
blood: and a sinful man lieth in wait for blood.

11:35. Take heed to thyself of a mischievous man, for he worketh evils:
lest he bring upon thee reproach for ever.

11:36. Receive a stranger in, and he shall overthrow thee with a
whirlwind, and shall turn thee out of thy own.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 12

We are to be liberal to the just: and not to trust the wicked.

12:1. If thou do good, know to whom thou dost it, and there shall be
much thanks for thy good deeds.

12:2. Do good to the just, and thou shalt find great recompense: and if
not of him, assuredly of the Lord.

12:3. For there is no good for him that is always occupied in evil, and
that giveth no alms: for the Highest hateth sinners, and hath mercy on
the penitent.

12:4. Give to the merciful and uphold not the sinner: God will repay
vengeance to the ungodly and to sinners, and keep them against the day
of vengeance.

12:5. Give to the good, and receive not a sinner.

12:6. Do good to the humble, and give not to the ungodly: hold back thy
bread, and give it not to him, lest thereby he overmaster thee.

12:7. For thou shalt receive twice as much evil for all the good thou
shalt have done to him: for the Highest also hateth sinners, and will
repay vengeance to the ungodly.

12:8. A friend shall not be known in prosperity, and an enemy shall not
be hidden in adversity.

12:9. In the prosperity of a man, his enemies are grieved: and a friend
is known in his adversity.

12:10. Never trust thy enemy for as a brass pot his wickedness rusteth:

12:11. Though he humble himself and go crouching, yet take good heed and
beware of him.

12:12. Set him not by thee, neither let him sit on thy right hand, lest
he turn into thy place, and seek to take thy seat and at the last thou
acknowledge my words, and be pricked with my sayings.

12:13. Who will pity an enchanter struck by a serpent, or any that come
near wild beasts? so is it with him that keepeth company with a wicked
man, and is involved in his sins.

12:14. For an hour he will abide with thee: but if thou begin to
decline, he will not endure it.

12:15. An enemy speaketh sweetly with his lips, but in his heart he
lieth in wait, to throw thee into a pit.

12:16. An enemy weepeth with his eyes: but if he find an opportunity he
will not be satisfied with blood:

12:17. And if evils come upon thee, thou shalt find him there first.

12:18. An enemy hath tears in his eyes, and while he pretendeth to help
thee, will undermine thy feet.

12:19. He will shake his head, and clap his hands, and whisper much, and
change his countenance.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 13

Cautions in the choice of company.

13:1. He that toucheth pitch, shall be defiled with it: and he that hath
fellowship with the proud, shall put on pride.

13:2. He shall take a burden upon him that hath fellowship with one more
honourable than himself. And have no fellowship with one that is richer
than thyself.

13:3. What agreement shall the earthen pot have with the kettle?  for if
they knock one against the other, it shall be broken.

13:4. The rich man hath done wrong, and yet he will fume: but the poor
is wronged and must hold his peace.

13:5. If thou give, he will make use of thee: and if thou have nothing,
he will forsake thee.

13:6. If thou have any thing, he will live with thee, and will make thee
bare, and he will not be sorry for thee.

13:7. If he have need of thee he will deceive thee, and smiling upon
thee will put thee in hope; he will speak thee fair, and will say: What
wantest thou?

13:8. And he will shame thee by his meats, till he have drawn thee dry
twice or thrice, and at last he will laugh at thee: and afterward when
he seeth thee, he will forsake thee, and shake his head at thee.

13:9. Humble thyself to God, and wait for his hands.

13:10. Beware that thou be not deceived into folly, and be humbled.

13:11. Be not lowly in thy wisdom, lest being humbled thou be deceived
into folly.

13:12. If thou be invited by one that is mightier, withdraw thyself: for
so he will invite thee the more.

13:13. Be not troublesome to him, lest thou be put back: and keep not
far from him, lest thou be forgotten.

13:14. Affect not to speak with him as an equal, and believe not his
many words: for by much talk he will sift thee, and smiling will examine
thee concerning thy secrets.

13:15. His cruel mind will lay up thy words: and he will not spare to do
thee hurt, and to cast thee into prison.

13:16. Take heed to thyself, and attend diligently to what thou hearest:
for thou walkest in danger of thy ruin.

13:17. When thou hearest those things, see as it were in sleep, and thou
shalt awake.

13:18. Love God all thy life, and call upon him for thy salvation.

13:19. Every beast loveth its like: so also every man him that is
nearest to himself.

13:20. All flesh shall consort with the like to itself, and every man
shall associate himself to his like.

13:21. If the wolf shall at any time have fellowship with the lamb, so
the sinner with the just.

13:22. What fellowship hath a holy man with a dog, or what part hath the
rich with the poor?

13:23. The wild ass is the lion's prey in the desert: so also the poor
are devoured by the rich.

13:24. And as humility is an abomination to the proud: so also the rich
man abhorreth the poor.

13:25. When a rich man is shaken, he is kept up by his friends: but when
a poor man is fallen down, he is thrust away even by his acquaintance.

13:26. When a rich man hath been deceived, he hath many helpers: he hath
spoken proud things, and they have justified him.

13:27. The poor man was deceived, and he is rebuked also: he hath spoken
wisely, and could have no place.

13:28. The rich man spoke, and all held their peace, and what he said
they extol even to the clouds.

13:29. The poor man spoke, and they say: Who is this? and if he stumble,
they will overthrow him.

13:30. Riches are good to him that hath no sin in his conscience: and
poverty is very wicked in the mouth of the ungodly.

13:31. The heart of a man changeth his countenance, either for good, or
for evil.

13:32. The token of a good heart, and a good countenance thou shalt
hardly find, and with labour.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 14

The evil of avarice: works of mercy are recommended, and the love of
wisdom.

14:1. Blessed is the man that hath not slipped by a word out of his
mouth, and is not pricked with the remorse of sin.

14:2. Happy is he that hath had no sadness of his mind, and who is not
fallen from his hope.

14:3. Riches are not comely for a covetous man and a niggard, and what
should an envious man do with gold?

14:4. He that gathereth together by wronging his own soul, gathereth for
others, and another will squander away his goods in rioting.

14:5. He that is evil to himself, to whom will he be good? and he shall
not take pleasure in his goods.

14:6. There is none worse than he that envieth himself, and this is the
reward of his wickedness:

14:7. And if he do good, he doth it ignorantly, and unwillingly: and at
the last he discovereth his wickedness.

14:8. The eye of the envious is wicked: and he turneth away his face,
and despiseth his own soul.

14:9. The eye of the covetous man is insatiable in his portion of
iniquity: he will not be satisfied till he consume his own soul, drying
it up.

14:10. An evil eye is towards evil things: and he shall not have his
fill of bread, but shall be needy and pensive at his own table.

14:11. My son, if thou have any thing, do good to thyself, and offer to
God worthy offerings.

14:12. Remember that death is not slow, and that the covenant of hell
hath been shewn to thee: for the covenant of this world shall surely
die.

Covenant of hell... The decree by which all are to go down to the
regions of death.

14:13. Do good to thy friend before thou die, and according to thy
ability, stretching out thy hand give to the poor.

14:14. Defraud not thyself of the good day, and let not the part of a
good gift overpass thee.

14:15. Shalt thou not leave to others to divide by lot thy sorrows and
labours?

14:16. Give and take, and justify thy soul.

14:17. Before thy death work justice: for in hell there is no finding
food.

14:18. All flesh shall fade as grass, and as the leaf that springeth out
on a green tree.

14:19. Some grow, and some fall off: so is the generation of flesh and
blood, one cometh to an end, and another is born.

14:20. Every work that is corruptible shall fail in the end: and the
worker thereof shall go with it.

14:21. And every excellent work shall be justified: and the worker
thereof shall be honoured therein.

14:22. Blessed is the man that shall continue in wisdom, and that shall
meditate in his justice, and in his mind shall think of the all seeing
eye of God.

14:23. He that considereth her ways in his heart, and hath understanding
in her secrets, who goeth after her as one that traceth, and stayeth in
her ways.

14:24. He who looketh in at her windows, and hearkeneth at her door.

14:25. He that lodgeth near her house, and fastening a pin in her walls
shall set up his tent high unto her, where good things shall rest in his
lodging for ever.

14:26. He shall set his children under her shelter, and shall lodge
under her branches:

14:27. He shall be protected under her covering from the heat, and shall
rest in her glory.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 15

Wisdom embraceth them that fear God. God is not the author of sin.

15:1. He that feareth God, will do good: and he that possesseth justice,
shall lay hold on her,

15:2. And she will meet him as an honourable mother, and will receive
him as a wife married of a virgin.

15:3. With the bread of life and understanding, she shall feed him, and
give him the water of wholesome wisdom to drink: and she shall be made
strong in him, and he shall not be moved.

15:4. And she shall hold him fast, and he shall not be confounded: and
she shall exalt him among his neighbours.

15:5. And in the midst of the church she shall open his mouth, and shall
fill him with the spirit of wisdom and understanding, and shall clothe
him with a robe of glory.

15:6. She shall heap upon him a treasure of joy and gladness, and shall
cause him to inherit an everlasting name.

15:7. But foolish men shall not obtain her, and wise men shall meet her,
foolish men shall not see her: for she is far from pride and deceit.

15:8. Lying men shall be mindful of her: but men that speak truth shall
be found with her, and shall advance, even till they come to the sight
of God.

15:9. Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner:

15:10. For wisdom came forth from God: for praise shall be with the
wisdom of God, and shall abound in a faithful mouth, and the sovereign
Lord will give praise unto it.

15:11. Say not: It is through God, that she is not with me: for do not
thou the things that he hateth.

15:12. Say not: He hath caused me to err: for he hath no need of wicked
men.

15:13. The Lord hateth all abomination of error, and they that fear him
shall not love it.

15:14. God made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his
own counsel.

15:15. He added his commandments and precepts.

15:16. If thou wilt keep the commandments and perform acceptable
fidelity for ever, they shall preserve thee.

15:17. He hath set water and fire before thee: stretch forth thy hand to
which thou wilt.

15:18. Before man is life and death, good and evil, that which he shall
choose shall be given him:

15:19. For the wisdom of God is great, and he is strong in power, seeing
all men without ceasing.

15:20. The eyes of the Lord are towards them that fear him, and he
knoweth al the work of man.

15:21. He hath commanded no man to do wickedly, and he hath given no man
license to sin;

15:22. For he desireth not a multitude of faithless and unprofitable
children.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 16

It is better to have none than many wicked children. Of the justice and
mercy of God. His ways are unsearchable.

16:1. Rejoice not in ungodly children, if they be multiplied: neither be
delighted in them, if the fear of God be not with them.

16:2. Trust not to their life, and respect not their labours.

16:3. For better is one that feareth God, than a thousand ungodly
children.

16:4. And it is better to die without children, than to leave ungodly
children.

16:5. By one that is wise a country shall be inhabited, the tribe of the
ungodly shall become desolate.

16:6. Many such things hath my eyes seen, and greater things than these
my ear hath heard.

16:7. In the congregation of sinners a fire shall be kindled, and in an
unbelieving nation wrath shall flame out.

16:8. The ancient giants did not obtain pardon for their sins, who were
destroyed trusting to their own strength:

16:9. And he spared not the place where Lot sojourned, but abhorred them
for the pride of their word.

16:10. He had not pity on them, destroying the whole nation that
extolled themselves in their sins.

16:11. So did he with the six hundred thousand footmen, who were
gathered together in the hardness of their heart: and if one had been
stiffnecked, it is a wonder if he had escaped unpunished:

Six hundred thousand footmen, etc... Viz., the children of Israel, whom
he sentenced to die in the wilderness. Num. 14.

16:12. For mercy and wrath are with him. He is mighty to forgive, and to
pour out indignation:

16:13. According as his mercy is, so his correction judgeth a man
according to his works.

16:14. The sinner shall not escape in his rapines, and the patience of
him that sheweth mercy shall not be put off.

16:15. All mercy shall make a place for every man according to the merit
of his works, and according to the wisdom of his sojournment.

16:16. Say not: I shall be hidden from God, and who shall remember me
from on high?

16:17. In such a multitude I shall not be known: for what is my soul in
such an immense creation?

16:18. Behold the heaven, and the heavens of heavens, the deep, and all
the earth, and the things that are in them, shall be moved in his sight,

16:19. The mountains also, and the hills, and the foundations of the
earth: when God shall look upon them, they shall be shaken with
trembling.

16:20. And in all these things the heart is senseless: and every heart
is understood by him.

16:21. And his ways who shall understand, and the storm, which no eye of
man shall see?

16:22. For many of his works are hidden, but the works of his justice
who shall declare? or who shall endure? for the testament is far from
some, and the examination of all is in the end.

16:23. He that wanteth understanding thinketh vain things, and the
foolish, and erring man, thinketh foolish things.

16:24. Hearken to me, my son, and learn the discipline of understanding,
and attend to my words in thy heart.

16:25. And I will shew forth good doctrine in equity, and will seek to
declare wisdom: and attend to my words in thy heart, whilst with equity
of spirit I tell thee the virtues that God hath put upon his works from
the beginning, and I shew forth in truth his knowledge.

16:26. The works of God are done in judgment from the beginning, and
from the making of them he distinguished their parts, and their
beginnings in their generations.

16:27. He beautified their works for ever, they have neither hungered,
nor laboured, and they have not ceased from their works.

16:28. Nor shall any of them straiten his neighbour at any time.

16:29. Be not thou incredulous to his word.

16:30. After this God looked upon the earth, and filled it with his
goods.

16:31. The soul of every living thing hath shewn forth before the face
thereof, and into it they return again.

Shewn forth... Viz., the glory and power of God upon the earth.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 17

The creation and favour of God to man. An exhortation to turn to God.

17:1. God created man of the earth, and made him after his own image.

17:2. And he turned him into it again, and clothed him with strength
according to himself.

17:3. He gave him the number of his days and time, and gave him power
over all things that are upon the earth.

17:4. He put the fear of him upon all flesh, and he had dominion over
beasts and fowls.

17:5. He created of him a helpmate like to himself, he gave them
counsel, and a tongue, and eyes, and ears, and a heart to devise: and he
filled them with the knowledge of understanding.

17:6. He created in them the science of the spirit, he fired their heart
with wisdom, and shewed them both good and evil.

17:7. He set his eye upon their hearts to shew them the greatness of his
works:

17:8. That they might praise the name which he hath sanctified: and
glory in his wondrous act that they might declare the glorious things of
his works.

17:9. Moreover he gave them instructions, and the law of life for an
inheritance.

17:10. He made an everlasting covenant with them, and he shewed them his
justice and judgments.

17:11. And their eye saw the majesty of his glory, and their ears heard
his glorious voice, and he said to them: Beware of all iniquity.

Their eye saw, etc... Viz., when he gave the law on mount Sinai.

17:12. And he gave to every one of them commandment concerning his
neighbour.

17:13. Their ways are always before him, they are not hidden from his
eyes.

17:14. Over every nation he set a ruler.

17:15. And Israel was made the manifest portion of God.

17:16. And all their works are as the sun in the sight of God: and his
eyes are continually upon their ways.

17:17. Their covenants were not hid by their iniquity, and all their
iniquities are in the sight of God.

17:18. The alms of a man is as a signet with him, and shall preserve the
grace of a man as the apple of the eye:

17:19. And afterward he shall rise up, and shall render them their
reward, to every one upon their own head, and shall turn them down into
the bowels of the earth.

17:20. But to the penitent he hath given the way of justice, and he hath
strengthened them that were fainting in patience, and hath appointed to
them the lot of truth.

17:21. Turn to the Lord, and forsake thy sins:

17:22. Make thy prayer before the face of the Lord, and offend less.

Offend less... Minue offendicula. That is, remove sins and the occasions
of sins.

17:23. Return to the Lord, and turn away from thy injustice, and greatly
hate abomination.

17:24. And know the justices and judgments of God, and stand firm in the
lot set before thee, and in prayer to the most high God.

17:25. Go to the side of the holy age, with them that live and give
praise to God.

Go to the side, etc... Fly from the side of Satan and sin, and join with
the holy ones, that follow God and godliness.

17:26. Tarry not in the error of the ungodly, give glory before death.
Praise perisheth from the dead as nothing.

17:27. Give thanks whilst thou art living, whilst thou art alive and in
health thou shalt give thanks, and shalt praise God, and shalt glory in
his mercies.

17:28. How great is the mercy of the Lord, and his forgiveness to them
that turn to him!

17:29. For all things cannot be in men, because the son of man is not
immortal, and they are delighted with the vanity of evil.

17:30. What is brighter than the sun; yet it shall be eclipsed. Or what
is more wicked than that which flesh and blood hath invented? and this
shall be reproved.

17:31. He beholdeth the power of the height of heaven: and all men are
earth and ashes.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 18

God's works are wonderful: we must serve him, and not our lusts.

18:1. He that liveth for ever created all things together. God only
shall be justified, and he remaineth an invincible king for ever.

18:2. Who is able to declare his works?

18:3. For who shall search out his glorious acts?

18:4. And who shall show forth the power of his majesty? or who shall be
able to declare his mercy?

18:5. Nothing may be taken away, nor added, neither is it possible to
find out the glorious works of God.

18:6. When a man hath done, then shall he begin: and when he leaveth
off, he shall be at a loss.

Then shall he begin... God is so great and incomprehensible, that when
man has done all that he can to find out his greatness and boundless
perfections, he is still to begin: for what he has found out, is but a
mere nothing in comparison with his infinity.

18:7. What is man, and what is his grace? and what is his good, or what
is his evil?

18:8. The number of the days of men at the most are a hundred years, as
a drop of water of the sea are they esteemed: and as a pebble of the
sand, so are a few years compared to eternity.

18:9. Therefore God is patient in them, and poureth forth his mercy upon
them.

18:10. He hath seen the presumption of their heart that it is wicked,
and hath known their end that it is evil.

18:11. Therefore hath he filled up his mercy in their favour, and hath
shewn them the way of justice.

18:12. The compassion of man is toward his neighbour: but the mercy of
God is upon all flesh.

18:13. He hath mercy, and teacheth, and correcteth, as a shepherd doth
his flock.

18:14. He hath mercy on him that receiveth the discipline of mercy, and
that maketh haste in his judgments.

18:15. My son, in thy good deeds, make no complaint, and when thou
givest any thing, add not grief by an evil word.

18:16. Shall not the dew assuage the heat? so also the good word is
better than the gift.

18:17. Lo, is not a word better than a gift? but both are with a
justified man.

18:18. A fool will upbraid bitterly: and a gift of one ill taught
consumeth the eyes.

18:19. Before judgment prepare thee justice, and learn before thou
speak.

18:20. Before sickness take a medicine, and before judgment examine
thyself, and thou shalt find mercy in the sight of God.

18:21. Humble thyself before thou art sick, and in the time of sickness
shew thy conversation.

18:22. Let nothing hinder thee from praying always, and be not afraid to
be justified even to death: for the reward of God continueth for ever.

18:23. Before prayer prepare thy soul: and be not as a man that tempteth
God.

18:24. Remember the wrath that shall be at the last day, and the time of
repaying when he shall turn away his face.

18:25. Remember poverty in the time of abundance, and the necessities of
poverty in the day of riches.

18:26. From the morning until the evening the time shall be changed, and
all these are swift in the eyes of God.

18:27. A wise man will fear in every thing, and in the days of sins will
beware of sloth.

18:28. Every man of understanding knoweth wisdom, and will give praise
to him that findeth her.

18:29. They that were of good understanding in words, have also done
wisely themselves: and have understood truth and justice, and have
poured forth proverbs and judgments.

18:30. Go not after thy lusts, but turn away from thy own will.

18:31. If thou give to thy soul her desires, she will make thee a joy to
thy enemies.

18:32. Take no pleasure in riotous assemblies, be they ever so small:
for their concertation is continual.

18:33. Make not thyself poor by borrowing to contribute to feasts when
thou hast nothing in thy purse: for thou shalt be an enemy to thy own
life.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 19

Admonition against sundry vices.

19:1. A workman that is a drunkard shall not be rich: and he that
contemneth small things, shall fall by little and little.

19:2. Wine and women make wise men fall off, and shall rebuke the
prudent:

19:3. And he that joineth himself to harlots, will be wicked.
Rottenness and worms shall inherit him, and he shall be lifted up for a
greater example, and his soul shall be taken away out of the number.

19:4. He that is hasty to give credit, is light of heart, and shall be
lessened: and he that sinneth against his own soul, shall be despised.

19:5. He that rejoiceth in iniquity, shall be censured, and he that
hateth chastisement, shall have less life: and he that hateth babbling,
extinguisheth evil.

19:6. He that sinneth against his own soul, shall repent: and he that is
delighted with wickedness, shall be condemned.

19:7. Rehearse not again a wicked and harsh word, and thou shalt not
fare the worse.

19:8. Tell not thy mind to friend or foe: and if there be a sin with
thee, disclose it not.

19:9. For he will hearken to thee, and will watch thee, and as it were
defending thy sin he will hate thee, and so will he be with thee always.

19:10. Hast thou heard a word against thy neighbour? let it die within
thee, trusting that it will not burst thee.

19:11. At the hearing of a word the fool is in travail, as a woman
groaning in the bringing forth a child.

19:12. As an arrow that sticketh in a man's thigh: so is a word in the
heart of a fool.

19:13. Reprove a friend, lest he may not have understood, and say: I did
it not: or if he did it, that he may do it no more.

19:14. Reprove thy neighbour, for it may be he hath not said it: and if
he hath said it, that he may not say it again.

19:15. Admonish thy friend: for there is often a fault committed.

19:16. And believe not every word. There is one, that slippeth with the
tongue, but not from his heart.

19:17. For who is there that hath not offended with his tongue?
Admonish thy neighbour before thou threaten him.

19:18. And give place to the fear of the most High: for the fear of God
is all wisdom, and therein is to fear God, and the disposition of the
law is in all wisdom.

19:19. But the learning of wickedness is not wisdom: and the device of
sinners is not prudence.

19:20. There is a subtle wickedness, and the same is detestable: and
there is a man that is foolish, wanting in wisdom.

19:21. Better is a man that hath less wisdom, and wanteth understanding,
with the fear of God, than he that aboundeth in understanding, and
transgresseth the law of the most High.

19:22. There is an exquisite subtilty, and the same is unjust.

19:23. And there is one that uttereth an exact word telling the truth.
There is one that humbleth himself wickedly, and his interior is full of
deceit:

19:24. And there is one that submitteth himself exceedingly with a great
lowliness: and there is one that casteth down his countenance, and
maketh as if he did not see that which is unknown:

19:25. And if he be hindered from sinning for want of power, if he shall
find opportunity to do evil, he will do it.

19:26. A man is known by his look, and a wise man, when thou meetest
him, is known by his countenance.

19:27. The attire of the body, and the laughter of the teeth, and the
gait of the man, shew what he is.

19:28. There is a lying rebuke in the anger of an injurious man: and
there is a judgment that is not allowed to be good: and there is one
that holdeth his peace, he is wise.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 20

Rules with regard to correction, discretion, and avoiding lies.

20:1. How much better is it to reprove, than to be angry, and not to
hinder him that confesseth in prayer.

20:2. The lust of an eunuch shall deflour a young maiden:

20:3. So is he that by violence executeth of the unwise.

20:4. How good is it, when thou art reproved, to shew repentance!  for
so thou shalt escape wilful sin.

20:5. There is one that holdeth his peace, that is found wise: and there
is another that is hateful, that is bold in speech.

20:6. There is one that holdeth his peace, because he knoweth not what
to say: and there is another that holdeth his peace, knowing the proper
time.

20:7. A wise man will hold his peace till he see opportunity: but a
babbler, and a fool, will regard no time.

20:8. He that useth many words shall hurt his own soul: and he that
taketh authority to himself unjustly shall be hated.

20:9. There is success in evil things to a man without discipline, and
there is a finding that turneth to loss.

20:10. There is a gift that is not profitable: and there is a gift, the
recompense of which is double.

20:11. There is an abasement because of glory: and there is one that
shall lift up his head from a low estate.

20:12. There is that buyeth much for a small price, and restoreth the
same sevenfold.

20:13. A man wise in words shall make himself beloved: but the graces of
fools shall be poured out.

20:14. The gift of the fool shall do thee no good: for his eyes are
sevenfold.

20:15. He will give a few things, and upbraid much: and the opening of
his mouth is the kindling of a fire.

20:16. To day a man lendeth, and to morrow he asketh it again: such a
man as this is hateful.

20:17. A fool shall have no friend, and there shall be no thanks for his
good deeds.

20:18. For they that eat his bread, are of a false tongue. How often,
and how many will laugh him to scorn!

20:19. For he doth not distribute with right understanding that which
was to be had: in like manner also that which was not to be had.

20:20. The slipping of a false tongue is as one that falleth on the
pavement: so the fall of the wicked shall come speedily.

20:21. A man without grace is as a vain fable, it shall be continually
in the mouth of the unwise.

20:22. A parable coming out of a fool's mouth shall be rejected: for he
doth not speak it in due season.

20:23. There is that is hindered from sinning through want, and in his
rest he shall be pricked.

20:24. There is that will destroy his own soul through shamefacedness,
and by occasion of an unwise person he will destroy it: and by respect
of person he will destroy himself.

20:25. There is that for bashfulness promiseth to his friend, and maketh
him his enemy for nothing.

20:26. A lie is a foul blot in a man, and yet it will be continually in
the mouth of men without discipline.

20:27. A thief is better than a man that is always lying: but both of
them shall inherit destruction.

20:28. The manners of lying men are without honour: and their confusion
is with them without ceasing.

20:29. A wise man shall advance himself with his words, and a prudent
man shall please the great ones.

20:30. He that tilleth his land shall make a high heap of corn: and he
that worketh justice shall be exalted: and he that pleaseth great men
shall escape iniquity.

20:31. Presents and gifts blind the eyes of judges, and make them dumb
in the mouth, so that they cannot correct.

20:32. O Wisdom that is hid, and treasure that is not seen: what profit
is there in them both?

20:33. Better is he that hideth his folly, than the man that hideth his
wisdom.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 21

Cautions against sin in general, and some sins in particular.

21:1. My son, hast thou sinned? do so no more: but for thy former sins
also pray that they may be forgiven thee.

21:2. Flee from sins as from the face of a serpent: for if thou comest
near them, they will take hold of thee.

21:3. The teeth thereof are the teeth of a lion, killing the souls of
men.

21:4. All iniquity is like a two-edged sword, there is no remedy for the
wound thereof.

21:5. Injuries and wrongs will waste riches: and the house that is very
rich shall be brought to nothing by pride: so the substance of the proud
shall be rooted out.

21:6. The prayer out of the mouth of the poor shall reach the ears of
God, and judgment shall come for him speedily.

21:7. He that hateth to be reproved walketh in the trace of a sinner:
and he that feareth God will turn to his own heart.

21:8. He that is mighty by a bold tongue is known afar off, but a wise
man knoweth to slip by him.

21:9. He that buildeth his house at other men's charges, is as he that
gathereth himself stones to build in the winter.

21:10. The congregation of sinners is like tow heaped together, and the
end of them is a flame of fire.

21:11. The way of sinners is made plain with stones, and in their end is
hell, and darkness, and pains.

21:12. He that keepeth justice shall get the understanding thereof.

21:13. The perfection of the fear of God is wisdom and understanding.

21:14. He that is not wise in good, will not be taught.

21:15. But there is a wisdom that aboundeth in evil: and there is no
understanding where there is bitterness.

21:16. The knowledge of a wise man shall abound like a flood, and his
counsel continueth like a fountain of life.

21:17. The heart of a fool is like a broken vessel, and no wisdom at all
shall it hold.

21:18. A man of sense will praise every wise word he shall hear, and
will apply it to himself: the luxurious man hath heard it, and it shall
displease him, and he will cast it behind his back.

21:19. The talking of a fool is like a burden in the way: but in the
lips of the wise, grace shall be found.

21:20. The mouth of the prudent is sought after in the church, and they
will think upon his words in their hearts.

21:21. As a house that is destroyed, so is wisdom to a fool: and the
knowledge of the unwise is as words without sense.

21:22. Doctrine to a fool is as fetters on the feet, and like manacles
on the right hand.

21:23. A fool lifteth up his voice in laughter: but a wise man will
scarce laugh low to himself.

21:24. Learning to the prudent is as an ornament of gold, and like a
bracelet upon his right arm.

21:25. The foot of a fool is soon in his neighbour's house: but a man of
experience will be abashed at the person of the mighty.

21:26. A fool will peep through the window into the house: but he that
is well taught will stand without.

21:27. It is the folly of a man to hearken at the door: and a wise man
will be grieved with the disgrace.

21:28. The lips of the unwise will be telling foolish things: but the
words of the wise shall be weighed in a balance.

21:29. The heart of fools is in their mouth: and the mouth of wise men
is in their heart.

21:30. While the ungodly curseth the devil, he curseth his own soul.

While the ungodly, etc... He condemneth and curseth himself: inasmuch as
by sin he takes part with the devil, and is, as it were, his member and
subject.

21:31. The talebearer shall defile his own soul, and shall be hated by
all: and he that shall abide with him shall be hateful: the silent and
wise man shall be honoured.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 22

Wise sayings on divers subjects.

22:1. The sluggard is pelted with a dirty stone, and all men will speak
of his disgrace.

22:2. The sluggard is pelted with the dung of oxen: and every one that
toucheth him will shake his hands.

22:3. A son ill taught is the confusion of the father: and a foolish
daughter shall be to his loss.

22:4. A wise daughter shall bring an inheritance to her husband: but she
that confoundeth, becometh a disgrace to her father.

22:5. She that is bold shameth both her father and husband, and will not
be inferior to the ungodly: and shall be disgraced by them both.

22:6. A tale out of time is like music in mourning: but the stripes and
instruction of wisdom are never out of time.

22:7. He that teacheth a fool, is like one that glueth a potsherd
together.

22:8. He that telleth a word to him that heareth not, is like one that
waketh a man out of a deep sleep.

22:9. He speaketh with one that is asleep, who uttereth wisdom to a
fool: and in the end of the discourse he saith: Who is this?

22:10. Weep for the dead, for his light hath failed: and weep for the
fool, for his understanding faileth.

For the fool... In the language of the Holy Ghost, he is styled a fool,
that turns away from God to follow vanity and sin. And what is said by
the wise man against fools is meant of such fools as these.

22:11. Weep but a little for the dead, for he is at rest.

22:12. For the wicked life of a wicked fool is worse than death.

22:13. The mourning for the dead is seven days: but for a fool and an
ungodly man all the days of their life.

22:14. Talk not much with a fool and go not with him that hath no sense.

22:15. Keep thyself from him, that thou mayst not have trouble, and thou
shalt not be defiled with his sin.

22:16. Turn away from him, and thou shalt find rest, and shalt not be
wearied out with his folly.

22:17. What is heavier than lead? and what other name hath he but fool?

22:18. Sand and salt, and a mass of iron is easier to bear, than a man
without sense, that is both foolish and wicked.

22:19. A frame of wood bound together in the foundation of a building,
shall not be loosed: so neither shall the heart that is established by
advised counsel.

22:20. The thought of him that is wise at all times, shall not be
depraved by fear.

22:21. As pales set in high places, and plasterings made without cost,
will not stand against the face of the wind:

22:22. So also a fearful heart in the imagination of a fool shall not
resist against the violence of fear.

22:23. As a fearful heart in the thought of a fool at all times will not
fear, so neither shall he that continueth always in the commandments of
God.

22:24. He that pricketh the eye, bringeth out tears: and he that
pricketh the heart, bringeth forth resentment.

22:25. He that flingeth a stone at birds, shall drive them away: so he
that upbraideth his friend, breaketh friendship.

22:26. Although thou hast drawn a sword at a friend, despair not: for
there may be a returning. To a friend,

22:27. If thou hast opened a sad mouth, fear not, for there may be a
reconciliation: except upbraiding, and reproach, and pride, and
disclosing of secrets, or a treacherous wound: for in all these cases a
friend will flee away.

22:28. Keep fidelity with a friend in his poverty, that in his
prosperity also thou mayst rejoice.

22:29. In the time of his trouble continue faithful to him, that thou
mayst also be heir with him in his inheritance.

22:30. As the vapour of a chimney, and the smoke of the fire goeth up
before the fire: so also injurious words, and reproaches, and threats,
before blood.

22:31. I will not be ashamed to salute a friend, neither will I hide
myself from his face: and if any evil happen to me by him, I will bear
it.

22:32. But every one that shall hear it, will beware of him.

22:33. Who will set a guard before my mouth, and a sure seal upon my
lips, that I fall not by them, and that my tongue destroy me not?

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 23

A prayer for grace to flee sin: cautions against profane swearing and
other vices.

23:1. O Lord, father, and sovereign ruler of my life, leave me not to
their counsel: nor suffer me to fall by them.

By them... Viz., the tongue and the lips, mentioned in the last verse of
the foregoing chapter.

23:2. Who will set scourges over my thoughts, and the discipline of
wisdom over my heart, that they spare me not in their ignorances, and
that their sins may not appear:

That they spare me not in their ignorances, etc... That is, that the
scourges and discipline of wisdom may restrain the ignorances, that is,
the slips and offences which are usually committed by the tongue and the
lips.

23:3. Lest my ignorances increase, and my offences be multiplied, and my
sins abound, and I fall before my adversaries, and my enemy rejoice over
me?

23:4. O Lord, father, and God of my life, leave me not to their devices.

23:5. Give me not haughtiness of my eyes, and turn away from me all
coveting.

23:6. Take from me the greediness of the belly, and let not the lusts of
the flesh take hold of me, and give me not over to a shameless and
foolish mind.

23:7. Hear, O ye children, the discipline of the mouth, and he that will
keep it shall not perish by his lips, nor be brought to fall into most
wicked works.

23:8. A sinner is caught in his own vanity, and the proud and the evil
speakers shall fall thereby.

23:9. Let not thy mouth be accustomed to swearing: for in it there are
many falls.

23:10. And let not the naming of God be usual in thy mouth, and meddle
not with the names of saints, for thou shalt not escape free from them.

23:11. For as a slave daily put to the question, is never without a blue
mark: so every one that sweareth, and nameth, shall not be wholly pure
from sin.

23:12. A man that sweareth much, shall be filled with iniquity, and a
scourge shall not depart from his house.

23:13. And if he make it void, his sin shall be upon him, and if he
dissemble it, he offendeth double:

23:14. And if he swear in vain, he shall not be justified: for his house
shall be filled with his punishment.

23:15. There is also another speech opposite to death, let it not be
found in the inheritance of Jacob.

23:16. For from the merciful all these things shall be taken away, and
they shall not wallow in sins.

23:17. Let not thy mouth be accustomed to indiscreet speech: for therein
is the word of sin.

23:18. Remember thy father and thy mother, for thou sittest in the midst
of great men:

23:19. Lest God forget thee in their sight, and thou, by thy daily
custom be infatuated and suffer reproach: and wish that thou hadst not
been born, and curse the day of thy nativity.

23:20. The man that is accustomed to opprobrious words, will never be
corrected all the days of his life.

23:21. Two sorts of men multiply sins, and the third bringeth wrath and
destruction.

23:22. A hot soul is a burning fire, it will never be quenched, till it
devour some thing.

23:23. And a man that is wicked in the mouth of his flesh, will not
leave off till he hath kindled a fire.

23:24. To a man that is a fornicator all bread is sweet, he will not be
weary of sinning unto the end.

23:25. Every man that passeth beyond his own bed, despising his own
soul, and saying: Who seeth me?

23:26. Darkness compasseth me about, and the walls cover me, and no man
seeth me: whom do I fear? the most High will not remember my sins.

23:27. And he understandeth not that his eye seeth all things, for such
a man's fear driveth him from the fear of God, and the eyes of men
fearing him:

23:28. And he knoweth not that the eyes of the Lord are far brighter
than the sun, beholding round about all the ways of men, and the bottom
of the deep, and looking into the hearts of men, into the most hidden
parts.

23:29. For all things were known to the Lord God, before they were
created: so also after they were perfected he beholdeth all things.

23:30. This man shall be punished in the streets of the city, and he
shall be chased as a colt: and where he suspected not, he shall be
taken.

23:31. And he shall be in disgrace with all men, because he understood
not the fear of the Lord.

23:32. So every woman also that leaveth her husband, and bringeth in an
heir by another:

23:33. For first she hath been unfaithful to the law of the most High:
and secondly, she hath offended against her husband: thirdly, she hath
fornicated in adultery, and hath gotten her children of another man.

23:34. This woman shall be brought into the assembly, and inquisition
shall be made of her children.

23:35. Her children shall not take root, and her branches shall bring
forth no fruit.

23:36. She shall leave her memory to be cursed, and her infamy shall not
be blotted out.

23:37. And they that remain shall know, that there is nothing better
than the fear of God: and that there is nothing sweeter than to have
regard to the commandments of the Lord.

23:38. It is great glory to follow the Lord: for length of days shall be
received from him.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 24

Wisdom praiseth herself: her origin, her dwelling, her dignity, and her
fruits.

24:1. Wisdom shall praise her own self, and shall be honoured in God,
and shall glory in the midst of her people,

24:2. And shall open her mouth in the churches of the most High, and
shall glorify herself in the sight of his power,

24:3. And in the midst of her own people she shall be exalted, and shall
be admired in the holy assembly.

24:4. And in the multitude of the elect she shall have praise, and among
the blessed she shall be blessed, saying:

24:5. I came out of the mouth of the most High, the firstborn before all
creatures:

24:6. I made that in the heavens there should rise light that never
faileth, and as a cloud I covered all the earth:

24:7. I dwelt in the highest places, and my throne is in a pillar of a
cloud.

24:8. I alone have compassed the circuit of heaven, and have penetrated
into the bottom of the deep, and have walked in the waves of the sea,

24:9. And have stood in all the earth: and in every people,

24:10. And in every nation I have had the chief rule:

24:11. And by my power I have trodden under my feet the hearts of all
the high and low: and in all these I sought rest, and I shall abide in
the inheritance of the Lord.

24:12. Then the creator of all things commanded, and said to me: and he
that made me, rested in my tabernacle,

24:13. And he said to me: Let thy dwelling be in Jacob, and thy
inheritance in Israel, and take root in my elect.

24:14. From the beginning, and before the world, was I created, and unto
the world to come I shall not cease to be, and in the holy dwelling
place I have ministered before him.

24:15. And so was I established in Sion, and in the holy city likewise I
rested, and my power was in Jerusalem.

24:16. And I took root in an honourable people, and in the portion of my
God his inheritance, and my abode is in the full assembly of saints.

24:17. I was exalted like a cedar in Libanus, and as a cypress tree on
mount Sion.

24:18. I was exalted like a palm tree in Cades, and as a rose plant in
Jericho:

24:19. As a fair olive tree in the plains, and as a plane tree by the
water in the streets, was I exalted.

24:20. I gave a sweet smell like cinnamon, and aromatical balm: I
yielded a sweet odour like the best myrrh:

24:21. And I perfumed my dwelling as storax, and galbanum, and onyx, and
aloes, and as the frankincense not cut, and my odour is as the purest
balm.

24:22. I have stretched out my branches as the turpentine tree, and my
branches are of honour and grace.

24:23. As the vine I have brought forth a pleasant odour: and my flowers
are the fruit of honour and riches.

24:24. I am the mother of fair love, and of fear, and of knowledge, and
of holy hope.

24:25. In me is all grace of the way and of the truth, in me is all hope
of life and of virtue.

24:26. Come over to me, all ye that desire me, and be filled with my
fruits.

24:27. For my spirit is sweet above honey, and my inheritance above
honey and the honeycomb.

24:28.  My memory is unto everlasting generations.

24:29. They that eat me, shall yet hunger: and they that drink me, shall
yet thirst.

24:30. He that hearkeneth to me, shall not be confounded: and they that
work by me, shall not sin.

24:31. They that explain me shall have life everlasting.

24:32. All these things are the book of life, and the covenant of the
most High, and the knowledge of truth.

24:33. Moses commanded a law in the precepts of justices, and an
inheritance to the house of Jacob, and the promises to Israel.

24:34. He appointed to David his servant to raise up of him a most
mighty king, and sitting on the throne of glory for ever.

A most mighty king... Viz., Christ, who by his gospel, like an
overflowing river, has enriched the earth with heavenly wisdom.

24:35. Who filleth up wisdom as the Phison, and as the Tigris in the
days of the new fruits.

24:36. Who maketh understanding to abound as the Euphrates, who
multiplieth it as the Jordan in the time of harvest.

24:37. Who sendeth knowledge as the light, and riseth up as Gehon in the
time of the vintage.

24:38. Who first hath perfect knowledge of her, and a weaker shall not
search her out.

Who first hath perfect knowledge of her... Christ was the first that had
perfect knowledge of heavenly wisdom.

24:39. For her thoughts are more vast than the sea, and her counsels
more deep than the great ocean.

24:40. I, wisdom, have poured out rivers.

24:41. I, like a brook out of a river of a mighty water; I, like a
channel of a river, and like an aqueduct, came out of paradise.

24:42. I said: I will water my garden of plants, and I will water
abundantly the fruits of my meadow.

24:43. And behold my brook became a great river, and my river came near
to a sea:

24:44. For I make doctrine to shine forth to all as the morning light,
and I will declare it afar off.

24:45. I will penetrate to all the lower parts of the earth, and will
behold all that sleep, and will enlighten all that hope in the Lord.

24:46. I will yet pour out doctrine as prophecy, and will leave it to
them that seek wisdom, and will not cease to instruct their offspring
even to the holy age.

24:47. See ye that I have not laboured myself only, but for all that
seek out the truth.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 25

Documents of wisdom on several subjects.

25:1. With three things my spirit is pleased, which are approved before
God and men:

25:2. The concord of brethren, and the love of neighbours, and man and
wife that agree well together.

25:3. Three sorts my soul hateth, and I am greatly grieved at their
life:

25:4. A poor man that is proud: a rich man that is a liar: an old man
that is a fool, and doting.

25:5. The things that thou hast not gathered in thy youth, how shalt
thou find them in thy old age?

25:6. O how comely is judgment for a grey head, and for ancients to know
counsel!

25:7. O how comely is wisdom for the aged, and understanding and counsel
to men of honour!

25:8. Much experience is the crown of old men, and the fear of God is
their glory.

25:9. Nine things that are not to be imagined by the heart have I
magnified, and the tenth I will utter to men with my tongue.

25:10. A man that hath joy of his children: and he that liveth and seeth
the fall of his enemies.

25:11. Blessed is he that dwelleth with a wise woman, and that hath not
slipped with his tongue, and that hath not served such as are unworthy
of him.

25:12. Blessed is he that findeth a true friend, and that declareth
justice to an ear that heareth.

25:13. How great is he that findeth wisdom and knowledge! but there is
none above him that feareth the Lord.

25:14. The fear of God hath set itself above all things:

25:15. Blessed is the man, to whom it is given to have the fear of God:
he that holdeth it, to whom shall he be likened?

25:16. The fear of God is the beginning of his love: and the beginning
of faith is to be fast joined unto it.

25:17. The sadness of the heart is every plague: and the wickedness of a
woman is all evil.

25:18. And a man will choose any plague, but the plague of the heart:

25:19. And any wickedness, but the wickedness of a woman:

25:20. And any affliction, but the affliction from them that hate him:

25:21. And any revenge, but the revenge of enemies.

25:22. There is no head worse than the head of a serpent:

25:23. And there is no anger above the anger of a woman. It will be more
agreeable to abide with a lion and a dragon, than to dwell with a wicked
woman.

25:24. The wickedness of a woman changeth her face: and she darkeneth
her countenance as a bear: and sheweth it like sackcloth. In the midst
of her neighbours,

25:25. Her husband groaned, and hearing he sighed a little.

25:26. All malice is short to the malice of a woman, let the lot of
sinners fall upon her.

25:27. As the climbing of a sandy way is to the feet of the aged, so is
a wife full of tongue to a quiet man.

25:28. Look not upon a woman's beauty, and desire not a woman for
beauty.

25:29. A woman's anger, and impudence, and confusion is great.

25:30. A woman, if she have superiority, is contrary to her husband.

25:31. A wicked woman abateth the courage, and maketh a heavy
countenance, and a wounded heart.

25:32. Feeble hands, and disjointed knees, a woman that doth not make
her husband happy.

25:33. From the woman came the beginning of sin, and by her we all die.

25:34. Give no issue to thy water, no, not a little: nor to a wicked
woman liberty to gad abroad.

25:35. If she walk not at thy hand, she will confound thee in the sight
of thy enemies.

25:36. Cut her off from thy flesh, lest she always abuse thee.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 26

Of good and bad women.

26:1. Happy is the husband of a good wife: for the number of his years
is double.

26:2. A virtuous woman rejoiceth her husband, and shall fulfil the years
of his life in peace.

26:3. A good wife is a good portion, she shall be given in the portion
of them that fear God, to a man for his good deeds.

26:4. Rich or poor, if his heart is good, his countenance shall be
cheerful at all times.

26:5. Of three things my heart hath been afraid, and at the fourth my
face hath trembled:

26:6. The accusation of a city, and the gathering together of the
people:

26:7. And a false calumny, all are more grievous than death.

26:8. A jealous woman is the grief and mourning of the heart.

26:9. With a jealous woman is a scourge of the tongue which
communicateth with all.

26:10. As a yoke of oxen that is moved to and fro, so also is a wicked
woman: he that hath hold of her, is as he that taketh hold of a
scorpion.

26:11. A drunken woman is a great wrath: and her reproach and shame
shall not be hid.

26:12. The fornication of a woman shall be known by the haughtiness of
her eyes and by her eyelids.

26:13. On a daughter that turneth not away herself, set a strict watch:
lest finding an opportunity she abuse herself.

26:14. Take heed of the impudence of her eyes, and wonder not if she
slight thee.

26:15. She will open her mouth as a thirsty traveller to the fountain,
and will drink of every water near her, and will sit down by every
hedge, and open her quiver against every arrow, until she fail.

26:16. The grace of a diligent woman shall delight her husband, and
shall fat his bones.

26:17. Her discipline is the gift of God.

26:18. Such is a wise and silent woman, and there is nothing so much
worth as a well instructed soul.

26:19. A holy and shamefaced woman is grace upon grace.

26:20. And no price is worthy of a continent soul.

26:21. As the sun when it riseth to the world in the high places of God,
so is the beauty of a good wife for the ornament of her house.

26:22. As the lamp shining upon the holy candlestick, so is the beauty
of the face in a ripe age,

26:23. As golden pillars upon bases of silver, so are the firm feet upon
the soles of a steady woman.

26:24. As everlasting foundations upon a solid rock, so the commandments
of God in the heart of a holy woman.

26:25. At two things my heart is grieved, and the third bringeth anger
upon me.

26:26. A man of war fainting through poverty, and a man of sense
despised:

26:27. And he that passeth over from justice to sin, God hath prepared
such an one for the sword.

26:28. Two sorts of callings have appeared to me hard and dangerous: a
merchant is hardly free from negligence: and a huckster shall not be
justified from the sins of the lips.

From negligence... That is, from the neglect of the service of God:
because the eager pursuit of the mammon of this world, is apt to make
men of that calling forget the great duties of loving God above all
things, and their neighbours as themselves.-Ibid. A huckster... Or, a
retailer of wine. Men of that profession are both greatly exposed to
danger of sin themselves, and are too often accessary to the sins of
others.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 27

Dangers of sin from several heads: the fear of God is the best
preservative. He that diggeth a pit, shall fall into it.

27:1. Through poverty many have sinned: and he that seeketh to be
enriched, turneth away his eye.

27:2. As a stake sticketh fast in the midst of the joining of stones, so
also in the midst of selling and buying, sin shall stick fast.

27:3. Sin shall be destroyed with the sinner.

27:4. Unless thou hold thyself diligently in the fear of the Lord, thy
house shall quickly be overthrown.

27:5. As when one sifteth with a sieve, the dust will remain: so will
the perplexity of a man in his thoughts.

27:6. The furnace trieth the potter's vessels, and the trial of
affliction just men.

27:7. As the dressing of a tree sheweth the fruit thereof, so a word out
of the thought of the heart of man.

27:8. Praise not a man before he speaketh, for this is the trial of men.

27:9. If thou followest justice, thou shalt obtain her: and shalt put
her on as a long robe of honour, and thou shalt dwell with her: and she
shall protect thee for ever, and in the day of acknowledgment thou shalt
find a strong foundation.

27:10. Birds resort unto their like: so truth will return to them that
practise her.

27:11. The lion always lieth in wait for prey: so do sins for them that
work iniquities.

27:12. A holy man continueth in wisdom as the sun: but a fool is changed
as the moon.

27:13. In the midst of the unwise keep in the word till its time: but be
continually among men that think.

27:14. The discourse of sinners is hateful, and their laughter is at the
pleasures of sin.

27:15. The speech that sweareth much shall make the hair of the head
stand upright: and its irreverence shall make one stop his ears.

27:16. In the quarrels of the road is the shedding of blood: and their
cursing is a grievous hearing.

27:17. He that discloseth the secret of a friend loseth his credit, and
shall never find a friend to his mind.

27:18. Love thy neighbour, and be joined to him with fidelity.

27:19. But if thou discover his secrets, follow no more after him.

27:20. For as a man that destroyeth his friend, so is he that destroyeth
the friendship of his neighbour.

27:21. And as one that letteth a bird go out of his hand, so hast thou
let thy neighbour go, and thou shalt not get him again.

27:22. Follow after him no more, for he is gone afar off, he is fled, as
a roe escaped out of the snare because his soul is wounded.

27:23. Thou canst no more bind him up. And of a curse there is
reconciliation:

And of a curse there is reconciliation... That is, it is easier to
obtain a reconciliation after a curse, than after disclosing a secret.

27:24. But to disclose the secrets of a friend, leaveth no hope to an
unhappy soul.

27:25. He that winketh with the eye forgeth wicked things, and no man
will cast him off:

27:26. In the sight of thy eyes he will sweeten his mouth, and will
admire thy words: but at the last he will writhe his mouth, and on thy
words he will lay a stumblingblock.

27:27. I have hated many things but not like him, and the Lord will hate
him.

27:28. If one cast a stone on high, it will fall upon his own head: and
the deceitful stroke will wound the deceitful.

27:29. He that diggeth a pit, shall fall into it: and he that setteth a
stone for his neighbour, shall stumble upon it: and he that layeth a
snare for another, shall perish in it.

27:30. A mischievous counsel shall be rolled back upon the author, and
he shall not know from whence it cometh to him.

27:31. Mockery and reproach are of the proud, and vengeance as a lion
shall lie in wait for him.

27:32. They shall perish in a snare that are delighted with the fall of
the just: and sorrow shall consume them before they die.

27:33. Anger and fury are both of them abominable, and the sinful man
shall be subject to them.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 28

Lessons against revenge and quarrels. The evils of the tongue.

28:1. He that seeketh to revenge himself, shall find vengeance from the
Lord, and he will surely keep his sins in remembrance.

28:2. Forgive thy neighbour if he hath hurt thee: and then shall thy
sins be forgiven to thee when thou prayest.

28:3. Man to man reserveth anger, and doth he seek remedy of God?

28:4. He hath no mercy on a man like himself, and doth he entreat for
his own sins?

28:5. He that is but flesh, nourisheth anger, and doth he ask
forgiveness of God? who shall obtain pardon for his sins?

28:6. Remember thy last things, and let enmity cease:

28:7. For corruption and death hang over in his commandments.

In his commandments... Supply the sentence out of the Greek thus:
Remember corruption and death, and abide in the commandments.

28:8. Remember the fear of God, and be not angry with thy neighbour.

28:9. Remember the covenant of the most High, and overlook the ignorance
of thy neighbour.

28:10. Refrain from strife, and thou shalt diminish thy sins.

28:11. For a passionate man kindleth strife, and a sinful man will
trouble his friends, and bring in debate in the midst of them that are
at peace.

28:12. For as the wood of the forest is, so the fire burneth, and as a
man's strength is, so shall his anger be, and according to his riches he
shall increase his anger.

28:13. A hasty contention kindleth a fire and a hasty quarrel sheddeth
blood and a tongue that beareth witness bringeth death.

28:14. If thou blow the spark, it shall burn as a fire: and if thou spit
upon it, it shall be quenched: both come out of the mouth.

28:15. The whisperer and the double tongue is accursed: for he hath
troubled many that were at peace.

28:16. The tongue of a third person hath disquieted many, and scattered
them from nation to nation.

28:17. It hath destroyed the strong cities of the rich, and hath
overthrown the houses of great men.

28:18. It hath cut in pieces the forces of people, and undone strong
nations.

28:19. The tongue of a third person hath cast out valiant women, and
deprived them of their labours.

28:20. He that hearkeneth to it, shall never have rest, neither shall he
have a friend in whom he may repose.

28:21. The stroke of a whip maketh a blue mark: but the stroke of the
tongue will break the bones.

28:22. Many have fallen by the edge of the sword, but not so many as
have perished by their own tongue.

28:23. Blessed is he that is defended from a wicked tongue, that hath
not passed into the wrath thereof, and that hath not drawn the yoke
thereof, and hath not been bound in its bands.

28:24. For its yoke is a yoke of iron: and its bands are bands of brass.

28:25. The death thereof is a most evil death: and hell is preferable to
it.

28:26. Its continuance shall not be for a long time, but it shall
possess the ways of the unjust: and the just shall not be burnt with its
flame.

28:27. They that forsake God shall fall into it, and it shall burn in
them, and shall not be quenched, and it shall be sent upon them as a
lion, and as a leopard it shall tear them.

28:28. Hedge in thy ears with thorns, hear not a wicked tongue, and make
doors and bars to thy mouth.

28:29. Melt down thy gold and silver, and make a balance for thy words,
and a just bridle for thy mouth:

28:30. And take heed lest thou slip with thy tongue, and fall in the
sight of thy enemies who lie in wait for thee, and thy fall be incurable
unto death.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 29

Of charity in lending money, and justice in repaying. Of alms, and of
being surety.

29:1. He that sheweth mercy, lendeth to his neighbour: and he that is
stronger in hand, keepeth the commandments.

And he that is stronger in hand... That is, he that is hearty and
bountiful in lending to his neighbour in his necessity.

29:2. Lend to thy neighbour in the time of his need, and pay thou thy
neighbour again in due time.

29:3. Keep thy word, and deal faithfully with him: and thou shalt always
find that which is necessary for thee.

29:4. Many have looked upon a thing lent as a thing found, and have
given trouble to them that helped them.

29:5. Till they receive, they kiss the hands of the lender, and in
promises they humble their voice:

29:6. But when they should repay, they will ask time, and will return
tedious and murmuring words, and will complain of the time:

29:7. And if he be able to pay, he will stand off, he will scarce pay
one half, and will count it as if he had found it:

29:8. But if not, he will defraud him of his money, and he shall get him
for an enemy without cause.

29:9. And he will pay him with reproaches and curses, and instead of
honour and good turn will repay him injuries.

29:10. Many have refused to lend, not out of wickedness, but they were
afraid to be defrauded without cause.

29:11. But yet towards the poor be thou more hearty, and delay not to
shew him mercy.

29:12. Help the poor because of the commandment: and send him not away
empty handed because of his poverty.

29:13. Lose thy money for thy brother and thy friend: and hide it not
under a stone to be lost.

29:14. Place thy treasure in the commandments of the most High, and it
shall bring thee more profit than gold.

29:15. Shut up alms in the heart of the poor, and it shall obtain help
for thee against all evil.

29:16. Better than the shield of the mighty, and better than the spear:

29:17. It shall fight for thee against thy enemy.

29:18. A good man is surety for his neighbour: and he that hath lost
shame, will leave him to himself.

29:19. Forget not the kindness of thy surety: for he hath given his life
for thee.

29:20. The sinner and the unclean fleeth from his surety.

29:21. A sinner attributeth to himself the goods of his surety: and he
that is of an unthankful mind will leave him that delivered him.

29:22. A man is surety for his neighbour: and when he hath lost all
shame, he shall forsake him.

29:23. Evil suretyship hath undone many of good estate, and hath tossed
them as a wave of the sea.

29:24. It hath made powerful men to go from place to place round about,
and they have wandered in strange countries.

29:25. A sinner that transgresseth the commandment of the Lord, shall
fall into an evil suretyship: and he that undertaketh many things, shall
fall into judgment.

29:26. Recover thy neighbour according to thy power, and take heed to
thyself that thou fall not.

29:27. The chief thing for man's life is water and bread, and clothing,
and a house to cover shame.

29:28. Better is the poor man's fare under a roof of boards, than
sumptuous cheer abroad in another man's house.

29:29. Be contented with little instead of much, and thou shalt not hear
the reproach of going abroad.

29:30. It is a miserable life to go as a guest from house to house: for
where a man is a stranger, he shall not deal confidently, nor open his
mouth.

29:31. He shall entertain and feed, and give drink to the unthankful,
and moreover he shall hear bitter words.

29:32. Go, stranger, and furnish the table, and give others to eat what
thou hast in thy hand.

29:33. Give place to the honourable presence of my friends: for I want
my house, my brother being to be lodged with me.

29:34. These things are grievous to a man of understanding: the
upbraiding of houseroom, and the reproaching of the lender.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 30

Of correction of children. Health is better than wealth. Excessive grief
is hurtful.

30:1. He that loveth his son, frequently chastiseth him, that he may
rejoice in his latter end, and not grope after the doors of his
neighbours.

30:2. He that instructeth his son shall be praised in him, and shall
glory in him in the midst of them of his household.

30:3. He that teacheth his son, maketh his enemy jealous, and in the
midst of his friends he shall glory in him.

30:4. His father is dead, and he is as if he were not dead: for he hath
left one behind him that is like himself.

30:5. While he lived he saw and rejoiced in him: and when he died he was
not sorrowful, neither was he confounded before his enemies.

30:6. For he left behind him a defender of his house against his
enemies, and one that will requite kindness to his friends.

30:7. For the souls of his sons he shall bind up his wounds, and at
every cry his bowels shall be troubled.

30:8. A horse not broken becometh stubborn, and a child left to himself
will become headstrong.

30:9. Give thy son his way, and he shall make thee afraid: play with
him, and he shall make thee sorrowful.

30:10. Laugh not with him, lest thou have sorrow, and at the last thy
teeth be set on edge.

30:11. Give him not liberty in his youth, and wink not at his devices.

30:12. Bow down his neck while he is young, and beat his sides while he
is a child, lest he grow stubborn, and regard thee not, and so be a
sorrow of heart to thee.

30:13. Instruct thy son, and labour about him, lest his lewd behaviour
be an offence to thee.

30:14. Better is a poor man who is sound, and strong of constitution,
than a rich man who is weak and afflicted with evils.

30:15. Health of the soul in holiness of justice, is better than all
gold and silver: and a sound body, than immense revenues.

30:16. There is no riches above the riches of the health of the body:
and there is no pleasure above the joy of the heart.

30:17. Better is death than a bitter life, and everlasting rest, than
continual sickness.

30:18. Good things that are hidden in a mouth that is shut, are as
messes of meat set about a grave.

30:19. What good shall an offering do to an idol? for it can neither
eat, nor smell:

30:20. So is he that is persecuted by the Lord, bearing the reward of
his iniquity:

30:21. He seeth with his eyes, and groaneth, as an eunuch embracing a
virgin, and sighing.

30:22. Give not up thy soul to sadness, and afflict not thyself in thy
own counsel.

30:23. The joyfulness of the heart, is the life of a man, and a never
failing treasure of holiness: and the joy of a man is length of life.

30:24.  Have pity on thy own soul, pleasing God, and contain thyself:
gather up thy heart in his holiness: and drive away sadness far from
thee.

30:25. For sadness hath killed many, and there is no profit in it.

30:26. Envy and anger shorten a man's days, and pensiveness will bring
old age before the time.

30:27. A cheerful and good heart is always feasting: for his banquets
are prepared with diligence.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 31

Of the desire of riches, and of moderation in eating and drinking.

31:1. Watching for riches consumeth the flesh, and the thought thereof
driveth away sleep.

31:2. The thinking beforehand turneth away the understanding, and a
grievous sickness maketh the soul sober.

31:3. The rich man hath laboured in gathering riches together, and when
he resteth he shall be filled with his goods.

31:4. The poor man hath laboured in his low way of life, and in the end
he is still poor.

31:5. He that loveth gold, shall not be justified: and he that followeth
after corruption, shall be filled with it.

31:6. Many have been brought to fall for gold, and the beauty thereof
hath been their ruin.

31:7. Gold is a stumblingblock to them that sacrifice to it: woe to them
that eagerly follow after it, and every fool shall perish by it.

31:8. Blessed is the rich man that is found without blemish: and that
hath not gone after gold, nor put his trust in money nor in treasures.

31:9. Who is he, and we will praise him? for he hath done wonderful
things in his life.

31:10. Who hath been tried thereby, and made perfect, he shall have
glory everlasting. He that could have transgressed, and hath not
transgressed: and could do evil things, and hath not done them:

31:11. Therefore are his goods established in the Lord, and all the
church of the saints shall declare his alms.

31:12. Art thou set at a great table? be not the first to open thy mouth
upon it.

31:13. Say not: There are many things which are upon it.

31:14. Remember that a wicked eye is evil.

31:15. What is created more wicked than an eye? therefore shall it weep
over all the face when it shall see.

31:16. Stretch not out thy hand first, lest being disgraced with envy
thou be put to confusion.

31:17. Be not hasty in a feast.

31:18. Judge of the disposition of thy neighbour by thyself.

31:19. Use as a frugal man the things that are set before thee: lest if
thou eatest much, thou be hated.

31:20. Leave off first, for manners' sake: and exceed not, lest thou
offend.

31:21. And if thou sittest among many, reach not thy hand out first of
all, and be not the first to ask for drink.

31:22. How sufficient is a little wine for a man well taught, and in
sleeping thou shalt not be uneasy with it, and thou shalt feel no pain.

31:23. Watching, and choler, and gripes, are with an intemperate man:

31:24. Sound and wholesome sleep with a moderate man: he shall sleep
till morning, and his soul shall be delighted with him.

31:25. And if thou hast been forced to eat much, arise, go out, and
vomit: and it shall refresh thee, and thou shalt not bring sickness upon
thy body.

31:26. Hear me, my son, and despise me not: and in the end thou shalt
find my words.

31:27. In all thy works be quick, and no infirmity shall come to thee.

31:28. The lips of many shall bless him that is liberal of his bread,
and the testimony of his truth is faithful.

31:29. Against him that is niggardly of his bread, the city will murmur,
and the testimony of his niggardliness is true.

31:30. Challenge not them that love wine: for wine hath destroyed very
many.

31:31. Fire trieth hard iron: so wine drunk to excess shall rebuke the
hearts of the proud.

31:32. Wine taken with sobriety is equal life to men: if thou drink it
moderately, thou shalt be sober.

31:33. What is his life, who is diminished with wine?

31:34. What taketh away life? death.

31:35. Wine was created from the beginning to make men joyful, and not
to make them drunk.

31:36. Wine drunken with moderation is the joy of the soul and the
heart.

31:37. Sober drinking is health to soul and body.

31:38. Wine drunken with excess raiseth quarrels, and wrath, and many
ruins.

31:39. Wine drunken with excess is bitterness of the soul.

31:40. The heat of drunkenness is the stumblingblock of the fool,
lessening strength and causing wounds.

31:41. Rebuke not thy neighbour in a banquet of wine: and despise him
not in his mirth.

31:42. Speak not to him words of reproach: and press him not in
demanding again.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 32

Lessons for superiors and inferiors. Advantages of fearing God, and
doing nothing without counsel.

32:1. Have they made thee ruler? be not lifted up: be among them as one
of them.

32:2. Have care of them, and so sit down, and when thou hast acquitted
thyself of all thy charge, take thy place:

32:3. That thou mayst rejoice for them, and receive a crown as an
ornament of grace, and get the honour of the contribution.

32:4. Speak, thou that art elder: for it becometh thee,

32:5. To speak the first word with careful knowledge, and hinder not
music.

32:6. Where there is no hearing, pour not out words, and be not lifted
up out of season with thy wisdom.

32:7. A concert of music in a banquet of wine is as a carbuncle set in
gold.

32:8. As a signet of an emerald in a work of gold: so is the melody of
music with pleasant and moderate wine.

32:9. Hear in silence, and for thy reverence good grace shall come to
thee.

32:10. Young man, scarcely speak in thy own cause.

32:11. If thou be asked twice, let thy answer be short.

32:12. In many things be as if thou wert ignorant, and hear in silence
and withal seeking.

32:13. In the company of great men take not upon thee: and when the
ancients are present, speak not much.

32:14. Before a storm goeth lightning: and before shamefacedness goeth
favour: and for thy reverence good grace shall come to thee.

32:15. And at the time of rising be not slack: but be first to run home
to thy house, and there withdraw thyself, and there take thy pastime.

32:16. And do what thou hast a mind, but not in sin or proud speech.

32:17. And for all these things bless the Lord, that made thee, and that
replenisheth thee with all his good things.

32:18. He that feareth the Lord, will receive his discipline: and they
that will seek him early, shall find a blessing.

32:19. He that seeketh the law, shall be filled with it: and he that
dealeth deceitfully, shall meet with a stumblingblock therein.

32:20. They that fear the Lord, shall find just judgment, and shall
kindle justice as a light.

32:21. A sinful man will flee reproof, and will find an excuse according
to his will.

32:22. A man of counsel will not neglect understanding, a strange and
proud man will not dread fear:

32:23. Even after he hath done with fear without counsel, he shall be
controlled by the things of his own seeking.

32:24. My son, do thou nothing without counsel, and thou shalt not
repent when thou hast done.

32:25. Go not in the way of ruin, and thou shalt not stumble against the
stones: trust not thyself to a rugged way, lest thou set a
stumblingblock to thy soul.

32:26. And beware of thy own children, and take heed of them of thy
household.

32:27. In every work of thine regard thy soul in faith: for this is the
keeping of the commandments.

In faith... That is, follow sincerely thy soul in her faith and
conscience.

32:28. He that believeth God, taketh heed to the commandments: and he
that trusteth in him, shall fare never the worse.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 33

The fear of God is the best security. Times and men are in the hands of
God. Take care of thyself as long as thou livest, and look to thy
servants.

33:1. No evils shall happen to him that feareth the Lord, but in
temptation God will keep him and deliver him from evils.

33:2. A wise man hateth not the commandments and justices, and he shall
not be dashed in pieces as a ship in a storm.

33:3. A man of understanding is faithful to the law of God, and the law
is faithful to him.

33:4. He that cleareth up a question, shall prepare what to say, and so
having prayed he shall be heard, and shall keep discipline, and then he
shall answer.

33:5. The heart of a fool is as a wheel of a cart: and his thoughts are
like a rolling axletree.

33:6. A friend that is a mocker, is like a stallion horse: he neigheth
under every one that sitteth upon him.

33:7. Why doth one day excel another, and one light another, and one
year another year, when all come of the sun?

33:8. By the knowledge of the Lord they were distinguished, the sun
being made, and keeping his commandment.

33:9. And he ordered the seasons, and holidays of them, and in them they
celebrated festivals at an hour.

33:10. Some of them God made high and great days, and some of them he
put in the number of ordinary days. And all men are from the ground, and
out of the earth, from whence Adam was created.

33:11. With much knowledge the Lord hath divided them and diversified
their ways.

33:12. Some of them hath he blessed, and exalted: and some of them hath
he sanctified, and set near himself: and some of them hath he cursed and
brought low, and turned them from their station.

33:13. As the potter's clay is in his hand, to fashion and order it:

33:14. All his ways are according to his ordering: so man is in the hand
of him that made him, and he will render to him according to his
judgment.

33:15. Good is set against evil, and life against death: so also is the
sinner against a just man. And so look upon all the works of the most
High. Two and two, and one against another.

33:16. And I awaked last of all, and as one that gathereth after the
grapegatherers.

33:17. In the blessing of God I also have hoped: and as one that
gathereth grapes, have I filled the winepress.

33:18. See that I have not laboured for myself only, but for all that
seek discipline.

33:19. Hear me, ye great men, and all ye people, and hearken with your
ears, ye rulers of the church.

33:20. Give not to son or wife, brother or friend, power over thee while
thou livest; and give not thy estate to another, lest thou repent, and
thou entreat for the same.

33:21. As long as thou livest, and hast breath in thee, let no man
change thee.

Change thee... That is, so as to have this power over thee.

33:22. For it is better that thy children should ask of thee, than that
thou look toward the hands of thy children.

33:23. In all thy works keep the pre-eminence.

The pre-eminence... That is, be master in thy own house, and part not
with thy authority.

33:24. Let no stain sully thy glory. In the time when thou shalt end the
days of thy life, and in the time of thy decease, distribute thy
inheritance.

33:25. Fodder, and a wand, and a burden are for an ass: bread, and
correction, and work for a slave.

33:26. He worketh under correction, and seeketh to rest: let his hands
be idle, and he seeketh liberty.

33:27. The yoke and the thong bend a stiff neck, and continual labours
bow a slave.

33:28. Torture and fetters are for a malicious slave: send him to work,
that he be not idle:

33:29. For idleness hath taught much evil.

33:30. Set him to work: for so it is fit for him. And if he be not
obedient, bring him down with fetters, but be not excessive towards any
one, and do no grievous thing without judgment.

33:31. If thou have a faithful servant, let him be to thee as thy own
soul: treat him as a brother: because in the blood of thy soul thou hast
gotten him.

33:32. If thou hurt him unjustly, he will run away:

33:33. And if he rise up and depart, thou knowest not whom to ask, and
in what way to seek him.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 34

The vanity of dreams. The advantage of experience, and of the fear of
God.

34:1. The hopes of a man that is void of understanding are vain and
deceitful: and dreams lift up fools.

34:2. The man that giveth heed to lying visions, is like to him that
catcheth at a shadow, and followeth after the wind.

34:3. The vision of dreams is the resemblance of one thing to another:
as when a man's likeness is before the face of a man.

34:4. What can be made clean by the unclean? and what truth can come
from that which is false?

34:5. Deceitful divinations and lying omens and the dreams of evildoers,
are vanity:

34:6. And the heart fancieth as that of a woman in travail: except it be
a vision sent forth from the most High, set not thy heart upon them.

34:7. For dreams have deceived many, and they have failed that put their
trust in them.

34:8. The word of the law shall be fulfilled without a lie, and wisdom
shall be made plain in the mouth of the faithful.

34:9. What doth he know, that hath not been tried? A man that hath much
experience, shall think of many things: and he that hath learned many
things, shall shew forth understanding.

34:10. He that hath no experience, knoweth little: and he that hath been
experienced in many things, multiplieth prudence.

34:11. He that hath not been tried, what manner of things doth he know?
he that hath been surprised, shall abound with subtlety.

34:12. I have seen many things by travelling, and many customs of
things.

34:13. Sometimes I have been in danger of death for these things, and I
have been delivered by the grace of God.

34:14. The spirit of those that fear God, is sought after, and by his
regard shall be blessed.

34:15. For their hope is on him that saveth them, and the eyes of God
are upon them that love him.

34:16. He that feareth the Lord shall tremble at nothing, and shall not
be afraid: for he is his hope.

34:17. The soul of him that feareth the Lord is blessed.

34:18. To whom doth he look, and who is his strength?

34:19. The eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him, he is their
powerful protector, and strong stay, a defence from the heat, and a
cover from the sun at noon,

34:20. A preservation from stumbling, and a help from falling: he
raiseth up the soul, and enlighteneth the eyes, and giveth health, and
life, and blessing.

34:21. The offering of him that sacrificeth of a thing wrongfully
gotten, is stained, and the mockeries of the unjust are not acceptable.

34:22. The Lord is only for them that wait upon him in the way of truth
and justice.

34:23. The most High approveth not the gifts of the wicked: neither hath
he respect to the oblations of the unjust, nor will he be pacified for
sins by the multitude of their sacrifices.

34:24. He that offereth sacrifice of the goods of the poor, is as one
that sacrificeth the son in the presence of his father.

34:25. The bread of the needy, is the life of the poor: he that
defraudeth them thereof, is a man of blood.

34:26. He that taketh away the bread gotten by sweat, is like him that
killeth his neighbour.

34:27. He that sheddeth blood, and he that defraudeth the laborer of his
hire, are brothers.

34:28. When one buildeth up, and another pulleth down: what profit have
they but the labour?

34:29. When one prayeth, and another curseth: whose voice will God hear?

34:30. He that washeth himself after touching the dead, if he toucheth
him again, what doth his washing avail?

34:31. So a man that fasteth for his sins, and doth the same again, what
doth his humbling himself profit him? who will hear his prayer?

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 35

What sacrifices are pleasing to God.

35:1. He that keepeth the law, multiplieth offerings.

35:2. It is a wholesome sacrifice to take heed to the commandments, and
to depart from all iniquity.

35:3. And to depart from injustice, is to offer a propitiatory sacrifice
for injustices, and a begging of pardon for sins.

35:4. He shall return thanks, that offereth fine flour: and he that doth
mercy, offereth sacrifice.

35:5. To depart from iniquity is that which pleaseth the Lord, and to
depart from injustice, is an entreaty for sins.

35:6. Thou shalt not appear empty in the sight of the Lord.

35:7. For all these things are to be done because of the commandment of
God.

35:8. The oblation of the just maketh the altar fat, and is an odour of
sweetness in the sight of the most High.

35:9. The sacrifice of the just is acceptable, and the Lord will not
forget the memorial thereof.

35:10. Give glory to God with a good heart: and diminish not the
firstfruits of thy hands.

35:11. In every gift shew a cheerful countenance, and sanctify thy
tithes with joy.

35:12. Give to the most High according to what he hath given to thee,
and with a good eye do according to the ability of thy hands:

35:13. For the Lord maketh recompense, and will give thee seven times as
much.

35:14. Do not offer wicked gifts, for such he will not receive.

35:15. And look not upon an unjust sacrifice, for the Lord is judge, and
there is not with him respect of person.

35:16. The Lord will not accept any person against a poor man, and he
will hear the prayer of him that is wronged.

35:17. He will not despise the prayers of the fatherless: nor the widow,
when she poureth out her complaint.

35:18. Do not the widow's tears run down the cheek, and her cry against
him that causeth them to fall?

35:19. For from the cheek they go up even to heaven, and the Lord that
heareth will not be delighted with them.

35:20. He that adoreth God with joy, shall be accepted, and his prayer
shall approach even to the clouds.

35:21. The prayer of him that humbleth himself, shall pierce the clouds:
and till it come nigh he will not be comforted: and he will not depart
till the most High behold.

35:22. And the Lord will not be slack, but will judge for the just, and
will do judgment: and the Almighty will not have patience with them,
that he may crush their back:

35:23. And he will repay vengeance to the Gentiles, till he have taken
away the multitude of the proud, and broken the sceptres of the unjust,

35:24. Till he have rendered to men according to their deeds: and
according to the works of Adam, and according to his presumption,

35:25. Till he have judged the cause of his people, and he shall delight
the just with his mercy.

35:26. The mercy of God is beautiful in the time of affliction, as a
cloud of rain in the time of drought.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 36

A prayer for the church of God. Of a good heart, and a good wife.

36:1. Have mercy upon us, O God of all, and behold us, and shew us the
light of thy mercies:

36:2. And send thy fear upon the nations, that have not sought after
thee: that they may know that there is no God beside thee, and that they
may shew forth thy wonders.

36:3. Lift up thy hand over the strange nations, that they may see thy
power.

36:4. For as thou hast been sanctified in us in their sight, so thou
shalt be magnified among them in our presence,

36:5. That they may know thee, as we also have known thee, that there is
no God beside thee, O Lord.

36:6. Renew thy signs, and work new miracles.

36:7. Glorify thy hand, and thy right arm.

36:8. Raise up indignation, and pour out wrath.

36:9. Take away the adversary, and crush the enemy.

36:10. Hasten the time, and remember the end, that they may declare thy
wonderful works.

36:11. Let him that escapeth be consumed by the rage of the fire: and
let them perish that oppress thy people.

36:12. Crush the head of the princes of the enemies that say: There is
no other beside us.

36:13. Gather together all the tribes of Jacob: that they may know that
there no God besides thee, and may declare thy great works: and thou
shalt inherit them as from the beginning.

36:14. Have mercy on thy people, upon whom thy name is invoked: and upon
Israel, whom thou hast raised up to be thy firstborn.

36:15. Have mercy on Jerusalem, the city which thou hast sanctified, the
city of thy rest.

36:16. Fill Sion with thy unspeakable words, and thy people with thy
glory.

36:17. Give testimony to them that are thy creatures from the beginning,
and raise up the prophecies which the former prophets spoke in thy name.

36:18. Reward them that patiently wait for thee, that thy prophets may
be found faithful: and hear the prayers of thy servants,

36:19. According to the blessing of Aaron over thy people, and direct us
into the way of justice, and let all know that dwell upon the earth,
that thou art God the beholder of all ages.

36:20. The belly will devour all meat, yet one is better than another.

36:21. The palate tasteth venison and the wise heart false speeches.

36:22. A perverse heart will cause grief, and a man of experience will
resist it.

36:23. A woman will receive every man: yet one daughter is better than
another.

A woman will receive every man... That is, any man that her parents
propose to her to marry, though she does not like him, but marries in
obedience to her parents, who make the choice for her.

36:24. The beauty of a woman cheereth the countenance of her husband,
and a man desireth nothing more.

36:25. If she have a tongue that can cure, and likewise mitigate and
shew mercy: her husband is not like other men.

36:26. He that possesseth a good wife, beginneth a possession: she is a
help like to himself, and a pillar of rest.

36:27. Where there is no hedge, the possession shall be spoiled: and
where there is no wife, he mourneth that is in want.

36:28. Who will trust him that hath no rest, and that lodgeth
wheresoever the night taketh him, as a robber well appointed, that
skippeth from city to city.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 37

Of the choice of friends and counsellors.

37:1. Every friend will say: I also am his friend: but there is a
friend, that is only a friend in name. Is not this a grief even to
death?

37:2. But a companion and a friend shall be turned to an enemy.

37:3. O wicked presumption, whence camest thou to cover the earth with
thy malice, and deceitfulness?

37:4. There is a companion who rejoiceth with his friend in his joys,
but in the time of trouble, he will be against him.

37:5. There is a companion who condoleth with his friend for his belly's
sake, and he will take up a shield against the enemy.

37:6. Forget not thy friend in thy mind, and be not unmindful of him in
thy riches.

37:7. Consult not with him that layeth a snare for thee, and hide thy
counsel from them that envy thee.

37:8. Every counsellor giveth out counsel, but there is one that is a
counsellor for himself.

37:9. Beware of a counsellor. And know before what need he hath: for he
will devise to his own mind:

37:10. Lest he thrust a stake into the ground, and say to thee:

37:11. Thy way is good; and then stand on the other side to see what
shall befall thee.

37:12. Treat not with a man without religion concerning holiness, nor
with an unjust man concerning justice, nor with a woman touching her of
whom she is jealous, nor with a coward concerning war, nor with a
merchant about traffic, nor with a buyer of selling, nor with an envious
man of giving thanks,

37:13. Nor with the ungodly of piety, nor with the dishonest of honesty,
nor with the field laborer of every work,

37:14. Nor with him that worketh by the year of the finishing of the
year, nor with an idle servant of much business: give no heed to these
in any matter of counsel.

37:15. But be continually with a holy man, whomsoever thou shalt know to
observe the fear of God,

37:16. Whose soul is according to thy own soul: and who, when thou shalt
stumble in the dark, will be sorry for thee.

37:17. And establish within thyself a heart of good counsel: for there
is no other thing of more worth to thee than it.

37:18. The soul of a holy man discovereth sometimes true things, more
than seven watchmen that sit in a high place to watch.

37:19. But above all these things pray to the most High, that he may
direct thy way in truth.

37:20. In all thy works let the true word go before thee, and steady
counsel before every action.

37:21. A wicked word shall change the heart: out of which four manner of
things arise, good and evil, life and death: and the tongue is
continually the ruler of them. There is a man that is subtle and a
teacher of many, and yet is unprofitable to his own soul.

37:22. A skilful man hath taught many, and is sweet to his own soul.

37:23. He that speaketh sophistically, is hateful: he shall be destitute
of every thing.

37:24. Grace is not given him from the Lord: for he is deprived of all
wisdom.

37:25. There is a wise man that is wise to his own soul: and the fruit
of his understanding is commendable.

37:26. A wise man instructeth his own people, and the fruits of his
understanding are faithful.

37:27. A wise man shall be filled with blessings, and they that see
shall praise him.

37:28. The life of a man is in the number of his days: but the days of
Israel are innumerable.

37:29. A wise man shall inherit honour among his people, and his name
shall live for ever.

37:30. My son, prove thy soul in thy life: and if it be wicked, give it
no power:

37:31. For all things are not expedient for all, and every kind pleaseth
not every soul.

37:32. Be not greedy in any feasting, and pour not out thyself upon any
meat:

37:33. For in many meats there will be sickness, and greediness will
turn to choler.

37:34. By surfeiting many have perished, but he that is temperate, shall
prolong life.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 38

Of physicians and medicines: what is to be done in sickness, and how we
are to mourn for the dead. Of the employments of labourers and
artificers.

38:1. Honour the physician for the need thou hast of him: for the most
High hath created him.

38:2. For all healing is from God, and he shall receive gifts of the
king.

38:3. The skill of the physician shall lift up his head, and in the
sight of great men he shall be praised.

38:4. The most High hath created medicines out of the earth, and a wise
man will not abhor them.

38:5. Was not bitter water made sweet with wood?

38:6. The virtue of these things is come to the knowledge of men, and
the most High hath given knowledge to men, that he may be honoured in
his wonders.

38:7. By these he shall cure and shall allay their pains, and of these
the apothecary shall make sweet confections, and shall make up ointments
of health, and of his works there shall be no end.

38:8. For the peace of God is over all the face of the earth.

38:9. My son, in thy sickness neglect not thyself, but pray to the Lord,
and he shall heal thee.

38:10. Turn away from sin and order thy hands aright, and cleanse thy
heart from all offence.

38:11. Give a sweet savour, and a memorial of fine flour, and make a fat
offering, and then give place to the physician.

38:12. For the Lord created him: and let him not depart from thee, for
his works are necessary.

38:13. For there is a time when thou must fall into their hands:

38:14. And they shall beseech the Lord, that he would prosper what they
give for ease and remedy, for their conversation.

38:15. He that sinneth in the sight of his Maker, shall fall into the
hands of the physician.

38:16. My son, shed tears over the dead, and begin to lament as if thou
hadst suffered some great harm, and according to judgment cover his
body, and neglect not his burial.

38:17. And for fear of being ill spoken of weep bitterly for a day, and
then comfort thyself in thy sadness.

38:18. And make mourning for him according to his merit for a day, or
two, for fear of detraction.

38:19. For of sadness cometh death, and it overwhelmeth the strength,
and the sorrow of the heart boweth down the neck.

38:20. In withdrawing aside sorrow remaineth: and the substance of the
poor is according to his heart.

38:21. Give not up thy heart to sadness, but drive it from thee: and
remember the latter end.

38:22. Forget it not: for there is no returning, and thou shalt do him
no good, and shalt hurt thyself.

38:23. Remember my judgment: for thine also shall be so: yesterday for
me, and to day for thee.

38:24. When the dead is at rest, let his remembrance rest, and comfort
him in the departing of his spirit.

38:25. The wisdom of a scribe cometh by his time of leisure: and he that
is less in action, shall receive wisdom.

A scribe... That is, a doctor of the law, or, a learned man.

38:26.  With what wisdom shall he be furnished that holdeth the plough,
and that glorieth in the goad, that driveth the oxen therewith, and is
occupied in their labours, and his whole talk is about the offspring of
bulls?

38:27. He shall give his mind to turn up furrows, and his care is to
give the kine fodder.

38:28. So every craftsman and workmaster that laboureth night and day,
he who maketh graven seals, and by his continual diligence varieth the
figure: he shall give his mind to the resemblance of the picture, and by
his watching shall finish the work.

38:29. So doth the smith sitting by the anvil and considering the iron
work. The vapour of the fire wasteth his flesh, and he fighteth with the
heat of the furnace.

38:30. The noise of the hammer is always in his ears, and his eye is
upon the pattern of the vessel he maketh.

38:31. He setteth his mind to finish his work, and his watching to
polish them to perfection.

38:32. So doth the potter sitting at his work, turning the wheel about
with his feet, who is always carefully set to his work, and maketh all
his work by number:

38:33. He fashioneth the clay with his arm, and boweth down his strength
before his feet:

38:34. He shall give his mind to finish the glazing, and his watching to
make clean the furnace.

38:35. All these trust to their hands, and every one is wise in his own
art.

38:36. Without these a city is not built.

38:37. And they shall not dwell, nor walk about therein, and they shall
not go up into the assembly.

38:38. Upon the judges' seat they shall not sit, and the ordinance of
judgment they shall not understand, neither shall they declare
discipline and judgment, and they shall not be found where parables are
spoken:

38:39. But they shall strengthen the state of the world, and their
prayer shall be in the work of their craft, applying their soul, and
searching in the law of the most High.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 39

The exercises of the wise man. The Lord is to be glorified for his
works.

39:1. The wise man will seek out the wisdom of all the ancients, and
will be occupied in the prophets.

39:2. He will keep the sayings of renowned men, and will enter withal
into the subtilties of parables.

39:3. He will search out the hidden meanings of proverbs, and will be
conversant in the secrets of parables.

39:4. He shall serve among great men, and appear before the governor.

39:5. He shall pass into strange countries: for he shall try good and
evil among men.

39:6. He will give his heart to resort early to the Lord that made him,
and he will pray in the sight of the most High.

39:7. He will open his mouth in prayer, and will make supplication for
his sins.

39:8. For if it shall please the great Lord, he will fill him with the
spirit of understanding:

39:9. And he will pour forth the words of his wisdom as showers, and in
his prayer he will confess to the Lord.

39:10. And he shall direct his counsel, and his knowledge, and in his
secrets shall he meditate.

39:11. He shall shew forth the discipline he hath learned, and shall
glory in the law of the covenant of the Lord.

39:12. Many shall praise his wisdom, and it shall never be forgotten.

39:13. The memory of him shall not depart away, and his name shall be in
request from generation to generation.

39:14. Nations shall declare his wisdom, and the church shall shew forth
his praise.

39:15. If he continue, he shall leave a name above a thousand: and if he
rest, it shall be to his advantage.

39:16. I will yet meditate that I may declare: for I am filled as with a
holy transport.

39:17. By a voice he saith: Hear me, ye divine offspring, and bud forth
as the rose planted by the brooks of waters.

Ye divine offspring... He speaks to the children of Israel, the people
of God: whom he exhorts to bud forth and flourish with virtue.

39:18. Give ye a sweet odour as frankincense.

39:19. Send forth flowers, as the lily, and yield a smell, and bring
forth leaves in grace, and praise with canticles, and bless the Lord in
his works.

39:20. Magnify his name, and give glory to him with the voice of your
lips, and with the canticles of your mouths, and with harps, and in
praising him, you shall say in this manner:

39:21. All the works of the Lord are exceeding good.

39:22. At his word the waters stood as a heap: and at the words of his
mouth the receptacles of waters:

39:23. For at his commandment favour is shewn, and there is no
diminishing of his salvation.

39:24. The works of all flesh are before him, and there is nothing hid
from his eyes.

39:25. He seeth from eternity to eternity, and there is nothing
wonderful before him.

39:26. There is no saying: What is this, or what is that? for all things
shall be sought in their time.

39:27. His blessing hath overflowed like a river.

39:28. And as a flood hath watered the earth; so shall his wrath inherit
the nations, that have not sought after him.

39:29.  Even as he turned the waters into a dry land, and the earth was
made dry: and his ways were made plain for their journey: so to sinners
they are stumblingblocks in his wrath.

39:30. Good things were created for the good from the beginning, so for
the wicked, good and evil things.

39:31. The principal things necessary for the life of men, are water,
fire, and iron, salt, milk, and bread of flour, and honey, and the
cluster of the grape, and oil, and clothing.

39:32. All these things shall be for good to the holy, so to the sinners
and the ungodly they shall be turned into evil.

39:33. There are spirits that are created for vengeance, and in their
fury they lay on grievous torments.

39:34. In the time of destruction they shall pour out their force: and
they shall appease the wrath of him that made them.

39:35. Fire, hail, famine, and death, all these were created for
vengeance.

39:36. The teeth of beasts, and scorpions, and serpents, and the sword
taking vengeance upon the ungodly unto destruction.

39:37. In his commandments they shall feast, and they shall be ready
upon earth when need is, and when their time is come they shall not
transgress his word.

39:38. Therefore from the beginning I was resolved, and I have
meditated, and thought on these things and left them in writing,

39:39. All the works of the Lord are good, and he will furnish every
work in due time.

39:40. It is not to be said: This is worse than that: for all shall be
well approved in their time.

39:41. Now therefore with the whole heart and mouth praise ye him, and
bless the name of the Lord.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 40

The miseries of the life of man are relieved by the grace of God and his
fear.

40:1. Great labour is created for all men, and a heavy yoke is upon the
children of Adam from the day of their coming out of their mother's
womb, until the day of their burial into the mother of all.

40:2. Their thoughts, and fears of the heart, their imagination of
things to come, and the day of their end:

40:3. From him that sitteth on a glorious throne, unto him that is
humbled in earth and ashes:

40:4. From him that weareth purple, and beareth the crown, even to him
that is covered with rough linen: wrath, envy, trouble, unquietness, and
the fear of death, continual anger, and strife,

40:5. And in the time of rest upon his bed, the sleep of the night
changeth his knowledge.

40:6. A little and as nothing is his rest, and afterward in sleep, as in
the day of keeping watch.

40:7. He is troubled in the vision of his heart, as if he had escaped in
the day of battle. In the time of his safety he rose up, and wondereth
that there is no fear.

40:8. Such things happen to all flesh, from man even to beast, and upon
sinners are sevenfold more.

40:9. Moreover, death, and bloodshed, strife, and sword, oppressions,
famine, and affliction, and scourges:

40:10. All these things are created for the wicked, and for their sakes
came the flood.

40:11. All things that are of the earth, shall return to the earth
again, and all waters shall return to the sea.

40:12. All bribery, and injustice shall be blotted out, and fidelity
shall stand for ever.

40:13. The riches of the unjust shall be dried up like a river, and
shall pass away with a noise like a great thunder in rain.

40:14. While he openeth his hands he shall rejoice: but transgressors
shall pine away in the end.

40:15. The offspring of the ungodly shall not bring forth many branches,
and make a noise as unclean roots upon the top of a rock.

40:16. The weed growing over every water, and at the bank of the river,
shall be pulled up before all grass.

40:17. Grace is like a paradise in blessings, and mercy remaineth for
ever.

40:18. The life of a laborer that is content with what he hath, shall be
sweet, and in it thou shalt find a treasure.

40:19. Children, and the building of a city shall establish a name, but
a blameless wife shall be counted above them both.

40:20. Wine and music rejoice the heart, but the love of wisdom is above
them both.

40:21. The flute and the psaltery make a sweet melody, but a pleasant
tongue is above them both.

40:22. Thy eye desireth favour and beauty, but more than these green
sown fields.

40:23. A friend and companion meeting together in season, but above them
both is a wife with her husband.

40:24. Brethren are a help in the time of trouble, but mercy shall
deliver more than they.

40:25. Gold and silver make the feet stand sure: but wise counsel is
above them both.

40:26. Riches and strength lift up the heart: but above these is the
fear of the Lord.

40:27. There is no want in the fear of the Lord, and it needeth not to
seek for help.

40:28. The fear of the Lord is like a paradise of blessing, and they
have covered it above all glory.

40:29. My son, in thy lifetime be not indigent: for it is better to die
than to want.

40:30. The life of him that looketh toward another man's table is not to
be counted a life: for he feedeth his soul with another man's meat.

40:31. But a man, well instructed and taught, will look to himself.

40:32. Begging will be sweet in the mouth of the unwise, but in his
belly there shall burn a fire.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 41

Of the remembrance of death: of an evil and of a good name: of what
things we ought to be ashamed.

41:1. O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that hath
peace in his possessions!

41:2. To a man that is at rest, and whose ways are prosperous in all
things, and that is yet able to take meat!

41:3. O death thy sentence is welcome to the man that is in need, and to
him whose strength faileth:

41:4. Who is in a decrepit age, and that is in care about all things,
and to the distrustful that loseth patience!

41:5. Fear not the sentence of death. Remember what things have been
before thee, and what shall come after thee: this sentence is from the
Lord upon all flesh.

41:6. And what shall come upon thee by the good pleasure of the most
High? whether ten, or a hundred, or a thousand years.

41:7. For among the dead there is no accusing of life.

41:8. The children of sinners become children of abominations, and they
that converse near the houses of the ungodly.

41:9. The inheritance of the children of sinners shall perish, and with
their posterity shall be a perpetual reproach.

41:10. The children will complain of an ungodly father, because for his
sake they are in reproach.

41:11. Woe to you, ungodly men, who have forsaken the law of the most
high Lord.

41:12. And if you be born, you shall be born in malediction: and if you
die, in malediction shall be your portion.

41:13. All things that are of the earth, shall return into the earth: so
the ungodly shall from malediction to destruction.

41:14. The mourning of men is about their body, but the name of the
ungodly shall be blotted out.

41:15. Take care of a good name: for this shall continue with thee, more
than a thousand treasures precious and great.

41:16. A good life hath its number of days: but a good name shall
continue for ever.

41:17. My children, keep discipline in peace: for wisdom that is hid,
and a treasure that is not seen, what profit is there in them both?

41:18. Better is the man that hideth his folly, than the man that hideth
his wisdom.

41:19. Wherefore have a shame of these things I am now going to speak
of.

Have a shame, etc... That is to say, be ashamed of doing any of these
things, which I am now going to mention; for though sometimes
shamefacedness is not to be indulged: yet it is often good and
necessary: as in the following cases.

41:20. For it is not good to keep all shamefacedness: and all things do
not please all men in opinion.

41:21. Be ashamed of fornication before father and mother: and of a lie
before a governor and a man in power:

41:22. Of an offence before a prince, and a judge: of iniquity before a
congregation and a people:

41:23. Of injustice before a companion and friend: and in regard to the
place where thou dwellest,

41:24. Of theft, and of the truth of God, and the covenant: of leaning
with thy elbow over meat, and of deceit in giving and taking:

41:25. Of silence before them that salute thee: of looking upon a
harlot: and of turning away thy face from thy kinsman.

41:26. Turn not away thy face from thy neighbour, and of taking away a
portion and not restoring.

41:27. Gaze not upon another man's wife, and be not inquisitive after
his handmaid, and approach not her bed.

41:28. Be ashamed of upbraiding speeches before friends: and after thou
hast given, upbraid not.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 42

Of what things we ought not to be ashamed. Cautions with regard to
women. The works and greatness of God.

42:1. Repeat not the word which thou hast heard, and disclose not the
thing that is secret; so shalt thou be truly without confusion, and
shalt find favour before all men: be not ashamed of any of these things,
and accept no person to sin thereby:

42:2. Of the law of the most High, and of his covenant, and of judgment
to justify the ungodly:

42:3. Of the affair of companions and travellers, and of the gift of the
inheritance of friends:

42:4. Of exactness of balance and weights, of getting much or little:

42:5. Of the corruption of buying, and of merchants, and of much
correction of children, and to make the side of a wicked slave to bleed.

42:6. Sure keeping is good over a wicked wife.

42:7. Where there are many hands, shut up, and deliver all things in
number, and weight: and put all in writing that thou givest out or
receivest in.

42:8. Be not ashamed to inform the unwise and foolish, and the aged,
that are judged by young men: and thou shalt be well instructed in all
things, and well approved in the sight of all men living.

42:9. The father waketh for the daughter when no man knoweth, and the
care for her taketh away his sleep, when she is young, lest she pass
away the flower of her age, and when she is married, lest she should be
hateful:

42:10. In her virginity, lest she should be corrupted, and be found with
child in her father's house: and having a husband, lest she should
misbehave herself, or at the least become barren.

42:11. Keep a sure watch over a shameless daughter: lest at anytime she
make thee become a laughingstock to thy enemies, and a byword in the
city, and a reproach among the people, and she make thee ashamed before
all the multitude.

42:12. Behold not everybody's beauty: and tarry not among women.

42:13. For from garments cometh a moth, and from a woman the iniquity of
a man.

42:14. For better is the iniquity of a man, than a woman doing a good
turn, and a woman bringing shame and reproach.

Better is the iniquity, etc... That is, there is, commonly speaking,
less danger to be apprehended to the soul from the churlishness, or
injuries we receive from men, than from the flattering favours and
familiarity of women.

42:15. I will now remember the works of the Lord, and I will declare the
things I have seen. By the words of the Lord are his works.

42:16. The sun giving light hath looked upon all things, and full of the
glory of the Lord is his work.

42:17. Hath not the Lord made the saints to declare all his wonderful
works, which the Lord Almighty hath firmly settled to be established for
his glory?

42:18. He hath searched out the deep, and the heart of men: and
considered their crafty devices.

42:19. For the Lord knoweth all knowledge, and hath beheld the signs of
the world, he declareth the things that are past, and the things that
are to come, and revealeth the traces of hidden things.

42:20. No thought escapeth him, and no word can hide itself from him.

42:21. He hath beautified the glorious works of his wisdom: and he is
from eternity to eternity, and to him nothing may be added,

42:22. Nor can he be diminished, and he hath no need of any counsellor.

42:23. O how desirable are all his works, and what we can know is but as
a spark!

42:24. All these things live, and remain for ever, and for every use all
things obey him.

42:25. All things are double, one against another, and he hath made
nothing defective.

42:26. He hath established the good things of every one. And who shall
be filled with beholding his glory?

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 43

The works of God are exceedingly glorious and wonderful: no man is able
sufficiently to praise him.

43:1. The firmament on high is his beauty, the beauty of heaven with its
glorious shew.

43:2. The sun when he appeareth shewing forth at his rising, an
admirable instrument, the work of the most High.

43:3. At noon he burneth the earth, and who can abide his burning heat?
As one keeping a furnace in the works of heat:

43:4. The sun three times as much, burneth the mountains, breathing out
fiery vapours, and shining with his beams, he blindeth the eyes.

43:5. Great is the Lord that made him, and at his words he hath hastened
his course.

43:6. And the moon in all in her season, is for a declaration of times
and a sign of the world.

43:7. From the moon is the sign of the festival day, a light that
decreaseth in her perfection.

43:8. The month is called after her name, increasing wonderfully in her
perfection.

43:9. Being an instrument of the armies on high, shining gloriously in
the firmament of heaven.

43:10. The glory of the stars is the beauty of heaven; the Lord
enlighteneth the world on high.

43:11. By the words of the holy one they stand in judgment, and shall
never fall in their watches.

43:12. Look upon the rainbow, and bless him that made it: it is very
beautiful in its brightness.

43:13. It encompasseth the heaven about with the circle of its glory,
the hands of the most High have displayed it.

43:14. By his commandment he maketh the snow to fall apace, and sendeth
forth swiftly the lightnings of his judgment.

43:15. Through this are the treasures opened, and the clouds fly out
like birds.

43:16. By his greatness he hath fixed the clouds, and the hailstones are
broken.

43:17. At his sight shall the mountains be shaken, and at his will the
south wind shall blow.

43:18. The noise of his thunder shall strike the earth, so doth the
northern storm, and the whirlwind:

43:19. And as the birds lighting upon the earth, he scattereth snow, and
the falling thereof, is as the coming down of locusts.

43:20. The eye admireth at the beauty of the whiteness thereof, and the
heart is astonished at the shower thereof.

43:21. He shall pour frost as salt upon the earth: and when it freezeth,
it shall become like the tops of thistles.

43:22. The cold north wind bloweth, and the water is congealed into
crystal; upon every gathering together of waters it shall rest, and
shall clothe the waters as a breastplate.

43:23. And it shall devour the mountains, and burn the wilderness, and
consume all that is green as with fire.

43:24. A present remedy of all is the speedy coming of a cloud, and a
dew that meeteth it, by the heat that cometh, shall overpower it.

43:25. At his word the wind is still, and with his thought he appeaseth
the deep, and the Lord hath planted islands therein.

43:26. Let them that sail on the sea, tell the dangers thereof: and when
we hear with our ears, we shall admire.

43:27. There are great and wonderful works: a variety of beasts, and of
all living things, and the monstrous creatures of whales.

43:28. Through him is established the end of their journey, and by his
word all things are regulated.

43:29. We shall say much, and yet shall want words: but the sum of our
words is, He is all.

43:30. What shall we be able to do to glorify him? for the Almighty
himself is above all his works.

43:31. The Lord is terrible, and exceeding great, and his power is
admirable.

43:32. Glorify the Lord as much as ever you can, for he will yet far
exceed, and his magnificence is wonderful.

43:33. Blessing the Lord, exalt him as much as you can; for he is above
all praise.

43:34. When you exalt him put forth all your strength, and be not weary:
for you can never go far enough.

43:35. Who shall see him, and declare him? and who shall magnify him as
he is from the beginning?

43:36. There are many things hidden from us that are greater than these:
for we have seen but a few of his works.

43:37. But the Lord hath made all things, and to the godly he hath given
wisdom.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 44

The praises of the holy fathers, in particular of Enoch, Noe, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob.

44:1. Let us now praise men of renown and our fathers in their
generation.

44:2. The Lord hath wrought great glory through his magnificence from
the beginning.

44:3. Such as have borne rule in their dominions, men of great power,
and endued with their wisdom, shewing forth in the prophets the dignity
of prophets,

44:4. And ruling over the present people, and by the strength of wisdom
instructing the people in most holy words.

44:5. Such as by their skill sought out musical tunes, and published
canticles of the scriptures.

44:6. Rich men in virtue, studying beautifulness: living at peace in
their houses.

44:7. All these have gained glory in their generations, and were praised
in their days.

44:8. They that were born of them have left a name behind them, that
their praises might be related:

44:9. And there are some, of whom there is no memorial: who are
perished, as if they had never been: and are become as if they had never
been born, and their children with them.

44:10. But these were men of mercy, whose godly deeds have not failed:

44:11. Good things continue with their seed,

44:12. Their posterity are a holy inheritance, and their seed hath stood
in the covenants.

44:13. And their children for their sakes remain for ever: their seed
and their glory shall not be forsaken.

44:14. Their bodies are buried in peace, and their name liveth unto
generation and generation.

44:15. Let the people shew forth their wisdom, and the church declare
their praise.

44:16. Henoch pleased God, and was translated into paradise, that he may
give repentance to the nations.

44:17. Noe was found perfect, just, and in the time of wrath he was made
a reconciliation.

44:18. Therefore was there a remnant left to the earth, when the flood
came.

44:19. The covenants of the world were made with him, that all flesh
should no more be destroyed with the flood.

44:20. Abraham was the great father of a multitude of nations, and there
was not found the like to him in glory, who kept the law of the most
High, and was in covenant with him.

44:21. In his flesh he established the covenant, and in temptation he
was found faithful.

44:22. Therefore by an oath he gave him glory in his posterity, that he
should increase as the dust of the earth,

44:23. And that he would exalt his seed as the stars, and they should
inherit from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth.

44:24. And he did in like manner with Isaac for the sake of Abraham his
father.

44:25. The Lord gave him the blessing of all nations, and confirmed his
covenant upon the head of Jacob.

44:26. He acknowledged him in his blessings, and gave him an
inheritance, and divided him his portion in twelve tribes.

44:27. And he preserved for him men of mercy, that found grace in the
eyes of all flesh.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 45

The praises of Moses, of Aaron, and of Phinees.

45:1. Moses was beloved of God, and men: whose memory is in benediction.

45:2. He made him like the saints in glory, and magnified him in the
fear of his enemies, and with his words he made prodigies to cease.

45:3. He glorified him in the sight of kings, and gave him commandments
in the sight of his people, and shewed him his glory.

45:4. He sanctified him in his faith, and meekness, and chose him out of
all flesh.

45:5. For he heard him, and his voice, and brought him into a cloud.

45:6. And he gave him commandments before his face, and a law of life
and instruction, that he might teach Jacob his covenant, and Israel his
judgments.

45:7. He exalted Aaron his brother, and like to himself of the tribe of
Levi:

45:8. He made an everlasting covenant with him, and gave him the
priesthood of the nation, and made him blessed in glory,

45:9. And he girded him about with a glorious girdle, and clothed him
with a robe of glory, and crowned him with majestic attire.

45:10. He put upon him a garment to the feet, and breeches, and an
ephod, and he compassed him with many little bells of gold all round
about,

45:11. That as he went there might be a sound, and a noise made that
might be heard in the temple, for a memorial to the children of his
people.

45:12. He gave him a holy robe of gold, and blue, and purple, a woven
work of a wise man, endued with judgment and truth:

45:13. Of twisted scarlet the work of an artist, with precious stones
cut and set in gold, and graven by the work of a lapidary for a
memorial, according to the number of the tribes of Israel.

45:14. And a crown of gold upon his mitre wherein was engraved Holiness,
an ornament of honour: a work of power, and delightful to the eyes for
its beauty.

45:15. Before him there were none so beautiful, even from the beginning.

45:16. No stranger was ever clothed with them, but only his children
alone, and his grandchildren for ever.

45:17. His sacrifices were consumed with fire every day.

45:18. Moses filled his hands and anointed him with holy oil.

45:19. This was made to him for an everlasting testament, and to his
seed as the days of heaven, to execute the office of the priesthood, and
to have praise, and to glorify his people in his name.

45:20. He chose him out of all men living, to offer sacrifice to God,
incense, and a good savour, for a memorial to make reconciliation for
his people:

45:21. And he gave him power in his commandments, in the covenants of
his judgments, that he should teach Jacob his testimonies, and give
light to Israel in his law.

45:22. And strangers stood up against him, and through envy the men that
were with Dathan and Abiron, compassed him about in the wilderness, and
the congregation of Core in their wrath.

45:23. The Lord God saw and it pleased him not, and they were consumed
in his wrathful indignation.

45:24. He wrought wonders upon them, and consumed them with a flame of
fire.

45:25. And he added glory to Aaron, and gave him an inheritance, and
divided unto him the firstfruits of the increase of the earth.

45:26. He prepared them bread in the first place unto fulness: for the
sacrifices also of the Lord they shall eat, which he gave to him, and to
his seed.

45:27. But he shall not inherit among the people in the land, and he
hath no portion among the people: for he himself is his portion and
inheritance.

45:28. Phinees the son of Eleazar is the third in glory, by imitating
him in the fear of the Lord:

45:29. And he stood up in the shameful fall of the people: in the
goodness and readiness of his soul he appeased God for Israel.

45:30. Therefore he made to him a covenant of peace, to be the prince of
the sanctuary, and of his people, that the dignity of priesthood should
be to him and to his seed for ever.

45:31. And a covenant to David the king, the son of Jesse of the tribe
of Juda, an inheritance to him and to his seed, that he might give
wisdom into our heart to judge his people in justice, that their good
things might not be abolished, and he made their glory in their nation
everlasting.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 46

The praise of Josue, of Caleb, and of Samuel.

46:1. Valiant in war was Jesus the son of Nave, who was successor of
Moses among the prophets, who was great according to his name,

Jesus the son of Nave... So Josue is named in the Greek Bibles. For
Josue and Jesus signify the same thing, viz., a saviour.

46:2. Very great for the saving the elect of God, to overthrow the
enemies that rose up against them, that he might get the inheritance for
Israel.

46:3. How great glory did he gain when he lifted up his hands, and
stretched out swords against the cities?

46:4. Who before him hath so resisted? for the Lord himself brought the
enemies.

46:5. Was not the sun stopped in his anger, and one day made as two?

46:6. He called upon the most high Sovereign when the enemies assaulted
him on every side, and the great and holy God heard him by hailstones of
exceeding great force.

46:7. He made a violent assault against the nation of his enemies, and
in the descent he destroyed the adversaries.

And in the descent... Of Beth-horon (Jos. 10.).

46:8. That the nations might know his power, that it is not easy to
fight against God. And he followed the mighty one:

46:9. And in the days of Moses he did a work of mercy, he and Caleb the
son of Jephone, in standing against the enemy, and withholding the
people from sins, and appeasing the wicked murmuring.

46:10. And they two being appointed, were delivered out of the danger
from among the number of six hundred thousand men on foot, to bring them
into their inheritance, into the land that floweth with milk and honey.

46:11. And the Lord gave strength also to Caleb, and his strength
continued even to his old age, so that he went up to the high places of
the land, and his seed obtained it for an inheritance:

46:12. That all the children of Israel might see, that it is good to
obey the holy God.

46:13. Then all the judges, every one by name, whose heart was not
corrupted: who turned not away from the Lord,

46:14. That their memory might be blessed, and their bones spring up out
of their place,

46:15. And their name continue for ever, the glory of the holy men
remaining unto their children.

46:16. Samuel the prophet of the Lord, the beloved of the Lord his God,
established a new government, and anointed princes over his people.

46:17. By the law of the Lord he judged the congregation, and the God of
Jacob beheld, and by his fidelity he was proved a prophet.

46:18. And he was known to be faithful in his words, because he saw the
God of light:

46:19. And called upon the name of the Lord Almighty, in fighting
against the enemies who beset him on every side, when he offered a lamb
without blemish.

46:20. And the Lord thundered from heaven, and with a great noise made
his voice to be heard.

46:21. And he crushed the princes of the Tyrians, and all the lords of
the Philistines:

46:22. And before the time of the end of his life in the world, he
protested before the Lord, and his anointed: money, or any thing else,
even to a shoe, he had not taken of any man, and no man did accuse him.

46:23. And after this he slept, and he made known to the king, and
shewed him the end of his life, and he lifted up his voice from the
earth in prophecy to blot out the wickedness of the nation.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 47

The praise of Nathan, of David, and of Solomon: Of his fall and
punishment.

47:1. Then Nathan the prophet arose in the days of David.

47:2. And as the fat taken away from the flesh, so was David chosen from
among the children of Israel.

47:3. He played with lions as with lambs: and with bears he did in like
manner as with the lambs of the flock, in his youth.

47:4. Did not he kill the giant, and take away reproach from his people?

47:5. In lifting up his hand, with the stone in the sling he beat down
the boasting of Goliath:

47:6. For he called upon the Lord the Almighty, and he gave strength in
his right hand, to take away the mighty warrior, and to set up the horn
of his nation.

47:7. So in ten thousand did he glorify him, and praised him in the
blessings of the Lord, in offering to him a crown of glory:

47:8. For he destroyed the enemies on every side, and extirpated the
Philistines the adversaries unto this day: he broke their horn for ever.

47:9. In all his works he gave thanks to the holy one, and to the most
High, with words of glory.

47:10. With his whole heart he praised the Lord, and loved God that made
him: and he gave him power against his enemies:

47:11. And he set singers before the altar, and by their voices he made
sweet melody.

47:12. And to the festivals he added beauty, and set in order the solemn
times even to the end of his life, that they should praise the holy name
of the Lord, and magnify the holiness of God in the morning.

47:13. The Lord took away his sins, and exalted his horn for ever: and
he gave him a covenant of the kingdom, and a throne of glory in Israel.

47:14. After him arose up a wise son, and for his sake he cast down all
the power of the enemies.

47:15. Solomon reigned in days of peace, and God brought all his enemies
under him, that he might build a house in his name, and prepare a
sanctuary for ever: O how wise wast thou in thy youth!

47:16. And thou wast filled as a river with wisdom, and thy soul covered
the earth.

47:17. And thou didst multiply riddles in parables: thy name went abroad
to the islands far off, and thou wast beloved in thy peace.

47:18. The countries wondered at thee for thy canticles, and proverbs,
and parables, and interpretations,

47:19. And at the name of the Lord God, whose surname is, God of Israel.

47:20. Thou didst gather gold as copper, and didst multiply silver as
lead,

47:21. And thou didst bow thyself to women: and by thy body thou wast
brought under subjection.

47:22. Thou hast stained thy glory, and defiled thy seed so as to bring
wrath upon thy children, and to have thy folly kindled,

47:23. That thou shouldst make the kingdom to be divided, and out of
Ephraim a rebellious kingdom to rule.

47:24. But God will not leave off his mercy, and he will not destroy,
nor abolish his own works, neither will he cut up by the roots the
offspring of his elect: and he will not utterly take away the seed of
him that loveth the Lord.

47:25. Wherefore he gave a remnant to Jacob, and to David of the same
stock.

47:26. And Solomon had an end with his fathers.

47:27. And he left behind him of his seed, the folly of the nation,

47:28. Even Roboam that had little wisdom, who turned away the people
through his counsel:

47:29. And Jeroboam the son of Nabat, who caused Israel to sin, and
shewed Ephraim the way of sin, and their sins were multiplied
exceedingly.

47:30. They removed them far away from their land.

47:31. And they sought out all iniquities, till vengeance came upon
them, and put an end to all their sins.

Ecclesiasticus Chapte 48

The praise of Elias, of Eliseus, of Ezechias, and of Isaias.

48:1. And Elias the prophet stood up, as a fire, and his word burnt like
a torch.

48:2. He brought a famine upon them, and they that provoked him in their
envy, were reduced to a small number, for they could not endure the
commandments of the Lord.

48:3. By the word of the Lord he shut up the heaven, and he brought down
fire from heaven thrice.

48:4. Thus was Elias magnified in his wondrous works. And who can glory
like to thee?

48:5. Who raisedst up a dead man from below, from the lot of death, by
the word of the Lord God.

48:6. Who broughtest down kings to destruction, and brokest easily their
power in pieces, and the glorious from their bed.

48:7. Who heardest judgment in Sina, and in Horeb the judgments of
vengeance.

48:8. Who anointedst kings to penance, and madest prophets successors
after thee.

48:9. Who wast taken up in a whirlwind of fire, in a chariot of fiery
horses.

48:10. Who art registered in the judgments of times to appease the wrath
of the Lord, to reconcile the heart of the father to the son, and to
restore the tribes of Jacob.

48:11. Blessed are they that saw thee, and were honoured with thy
friendship.

48:12. For we live only in our life, but after death our name shall not
be such.

48:13. Elias was indeed covered with the whirlwind, and his spirit was
filled up in Eliseus: in his days he feared not the prince, and no man
was more powerful than he.

48:14. No word could overcome him, and after death his body prophesied.

48:15. In his life he did great wonders, and in death he wrought
miracles.

48:16. For all this the people repented not, neither did they depart
from their sins till they were cast out of their land, and were
scattered through all the earth.

48:17. And there was left but a small people, and a prince in the house
of David.

48:18. Some of these did that which pleased God: but others committed
many sins.

48:19. Ezechias fortified his city, and brought in water into the midst
thereof, and he digged a rock with iron, and made a well for water.

48:20. In his days Sennacherib came up, and sent Rabsaces, and lifted up
his hand against them, and he stretched out his hand against Sion, and
became proud through his power.

48:21. Then their hearts and hands trembled, and they were in pain as
women in travail.

48:22. And they called upon the Lord who is merciful, and spreading
their hands, they lifted them up to heaven: and the holy Lord God
quickly heard their voice.

48:23. He was not mindful of their sins, neither did he deliver them up
to their enemies, but he purified them by the hand of Isaias, the holy
prophet.

48:24. He overthrew the army of the Assyrians, and the angel of the Lord
destroyed them.

48:25. For Ezechias did that which pleased God, and walked valiantly in
the way of David his father, which Isaias, the great prophet, and
faithful in the sight of God, had commanded him.

48:26. In his days the sun wen backward, and he lengthened the king's
life.

48:27. With a great spirit he saw the things that are to come to pass at
last, and comforted the mourners in Sion.

48:28. He showed what should come to pass for ever, and secret things
before they came.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 49

The praise of Josias, of Jeremias, Ezechiel, and the twelve prophets.
Also of Zorobabel, Jesus the son of Josedech, Nehemias, Enoch, Joseph,
Seth, Sem, and Adam.

49:1. The memory of Josias is like the composition of a sweet smell made
by the art of a perfumer:

49:2. His remembrance shall be sweet as honey in every mouth, and as
music at a banquet of wine.

49:3. He was directed by God unto the repentance of the nation, and he
took away the abominations of wickedness.

49:4. And he directed his heart towards the Lord, and in the days of
sinners he strengthened godliness.

49:5. Except David, and Ezechias and Josias, all committed sin.

49:6. For the kings of Juda forsook the law of the most High, and
despised the fear of God.

49:7. So they gave their kingdom to others, and their glory to a strange
nation,

49:8. They burnt the chosen city of holiness, and made the streets
thereof desolate according to the prediction of Jeremias.

49:9. For they treated him evil, who was consecrated a prophet from his
mother's womb, to overthrow, and pluck up, and destroy, and to build
again, and renew.

49:10. It was Ezechiel that saw the glorious vision, which was shewn him
upon the chariot of cherubims.

49:11. For he made mention of the enemies under the figure of rain, and
of doing good to them that shewed right ways.

49:12. And may the bones of the twelve prophets spring up out of their
place: for they strengthened Jacob, and redeemed themselves by strong
faith.

49:13. How shall we magnify Zorobabel? for he was as a signet on the
right hand;

49:14. In like manner Jesus the son of Josedec who in their days built
the house, and set up a holy temple to the Lord, prepared for
everlasting glory.

49:15. And let Nehemias be a long time remembered, who raised up for us
our walls that were cast down, and set up the gates and the bars, who
rebuilt our houses.

49:16. No man was born upon earth like Henoch: for he also was taken up
from the earth.

49:17. Nor as Joseph, who was a man born prince of his brethren, the
support of his family, the ruler of his brethren, the stay of the
people:

49:18. And his bones were visited, and after death they prophesied.

They prophesied... That is, by their being carried out of Egypt they
verified the prophetic prediction of Joseph. Gen. 50.

49:19. Seth and Sem obtained glory among men: and above every soul Adam
in the beginning,

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 50

The praises of Simon the high priest. The conclusion.

50:1. Simon the high priest, the son of Onias, who in his life propped
up the house, and in his days fortified the temple.

50:2. By him also the height of the temple was founded, the double
building and the high walls of the temple.

50:3. In his days the wells of water flowed out, and they were filled as
the sea above measure.

50:4. He took care of his nation, and delivered it from destruction.

50:5. He prevailed to enlarge the city, and obtained glory in his
conversation with the people: and enlarged the entrance of the house and
the court.

50:6. He shone in his days as the morning star in the midst of a cloud,
and as the moon at the full.

50:7. And as the sun when it shineth, so did he shine in the temple of
God.

50:8. And as the rainbow giving light in bright clouds, and as the
flower of roses in the days of the spring, and as the lilies that are on
the brink of the water, and as the sweet smelling frankincense in the
time of summer.

50:9. As a bright fire, and frankincense burning in the fire.

50:10. As a massy vessel of gold, adorned with every precious stone.

50:11. As an olive tree budding forth, and a cypress tree rearing itself
on high, when he put on the robe of glory, and was clothed with the
perfection of power.

Clothed with the perfection of power... That is, with all the vestments
denoting his dignity and authority.

50:12. When he went up to the holy altar, he honoured the vesture of
holiness.

50:13. And when he took the portions out of the hands of the priests, he
himself stood by the altar. And about him was the ring of his brethren:
and as the cedar planted in mount Libanus,

50:14. And as branches of palm trees, they stood round about him, and
all the sons of Aaron in their glory.

50:15. And the oblation of the Lord was in their hands, before all the
congregation of Israel: and finishing his service, on the altar, to
honour the offering of the most high King,

50:16. He stretched forth his hand to make a libation, and offered of
the blood of the grape.

50:17. He poured out at the foot of the altar a divine odour to the most
high Prince.

50:18. Then the sons of Aaron shouted, they sounded with beaten
trumpets, and made a great noise to be heard for a remembrance before
God.

50:19. Then all the people together made haste, and fell down to the
earth upon their faces, to adore the Lord their God, and to pray to the
Almighty God the most High.

50:20. And the singers lifted up their voices, and in the great house
the sound of sweet melody was increased.

50:21. And the people in prayer besought the Lord the most High, until
the worship of the Lord was perfected, and they had finished their
office.

50:22. Then coming down, he lifted up his hands over all the
congregation of the children of Israel, to give glory to God with his
lips, and to glory in his name:

50:23. And he repeated his prayer, willing to shew the power of God.

50:24. And now pray ye to the God of all, who hath done great things in
all the earth, who hath increased our days from our mother's womb, and
hath done with us according to his mercy.

50:25. May he grant us joyfulness of heart, and that there be peace in
our days in Israel for ever:

50:26. That Israel may believe that the mercy of God is with us, to
deliver us in his days.

50:27. There are two nations which my soul abhorreth: and the third is
no nation: which I hate:

Abhorreth... Viz., with a holy indignation, as enemies of God and
persecutors of his people. Such were then the Edomites who abode in
mount Seir, the Philistines, and the Samaritans who dwelt in Sichem, and
had their schismatical temple in that neighbourhood.

50:28. They that sit on mount Seir, and the Philistines, and the foolish
people that dwell in Sichem.

50:29. Jesus the son of Sirach, of Jerusalem, hath written in this book
the doctrine of wisdom and instruction, who renewed wisdom from his
heart.

50:30. Blessed is he that is conversant in these good things and he that
layeth them up in his heart, shall be wise always.

50:31. For if he do them, he shall be strong to do all things: because
the light of God guideth his steps.

Ecclesiasticus Chapter 51

A prayer of praise and thanksgiving.

51:1. A prayer of Jesus the son of Sirach. I will give glory to thee, O
Lord, O King, and I will praise thee, O God my Saviour.

51:2. I will give glory to thy name: for thou hast been a helper and
protector to me.

51:3. And hast preserved my body from destruction, from the snare of an
unjust tongue, and from the lips of them that forge lies, and in the
sight of them that stood by, thou hast been my helper.

51:4. And thou hast delivered me, according to the multitude of the
mercy of thy name, from them that did roar, prepared to devour.

51:5. Out of the hands of them that sought my life, and from the gates
of afflictions, which compassed me about:

51:6. From the oppression of the flame which surrounded me, and in the
midst of the fire I was not burnt.

51:7. From the depth of the belly of hell, and from an unclean tongue,
and from lying words, from an unjust king, and from a slanderous tongue:

51:8. My soul shall praise the Lord even to death.

51:9. And my life was drawing near to hell beneath.

51:10. They compassed me on every side, and there was no one that would
help me. I looked for the succour of men, and there was none.

51:11. I remembered thy mercy, O Lord, and thy works, which are from the
beginning of the world.

51:12. How thou deliverest them that wait for thee, O Lord, and savest
them out of the hands of the nations.

51:13. Thou hast exalted my dwelling place upon the earth and I have
prayed for death to pass away.

51:14. I called upon the Lord, the father of my Lord, that he would not
leave me in the day of my trouble, and in the time of the proud without
help.

51:15. I will praise thy name continually, and will praise it with
thanksgiving, and my prayer was heard.

51:16. And thou hast saved me from destruction, and hast delivered me
from the evil time.

51:17. Therefore I will give thanks, and praise thee, and bless the name
of the Lord.

51:18. When I was yet young, before I wandered about, I sought for
wisdom openly in my prayer.

51:19. I prayed for her before the temple, and unto the very end I will
seek after her, and she flourished as a grape soon ripe.

51:20. My heart delighted in her, my foot walked in the right way, from
my youth up I sought after her.

51:21. I bowed down my ear a little, and received her.

51:22. I found much wisdom in myself, and profited much therein.

51:23. To him that giveth me wisdom, will I give glory.

51:24. For I have determined to follow her: I have had a zeal for good,
and shall not be confounded.

51:25. My soul hath wrestled for her, and in doing it I have been
confirmed.

51:26. I stretched forth my hands on high, and I bewailed my ignorance
of her.

51:27. I directed my soul to her, and in knowledge I found her.

51:28. I possessed my heart with her from the beginning: therefore I
shall not be forsaken.

51:29. My entrails were troubled in seeking her: therefore shall I
possess a good possession.

51:30. The Lord hath given me a tongue for my reward: and with it I will
praise him.

51:31. Draw near to me, ye unlearned, and gather yourselves together
into the hours of discipline.

51:32. Why are ye slow and what do you say of these things? your souls
are exceeding thirsty.

51:33. I have opened my mouth, and have spoken: buy her for yourselves
without silver,

51:34. And submit your neck to the yoke, and let your soul receive
discipline: for she is near at hand to be found.

51:35. Behold with your eyes how I have laboured a little, and have
found much rest to myself.

51:36. Receive ye discipline as a great sum of money, and possess
abundance of gold by her.

51:37. Let your soul rejoice in his mercy and you shall not be
confounded in his praise.

51:38. Work your work before the time, and he will give you your reward
in his time.