
ered from the bad. The numerous grades of prophets, of 
saints, and of holy men are ordained, as so many curtains of 
the light of God, to tone down its brilliance, and make it 
visible to all grades of human sight. 

Notes: 

1. Koran vii. 13. 

2. Koran ii. 279. 



107 
Book Two 

3. cf. Gulshan i Raz, p. 86. 

4. This couplet exercises both the Turkish and the Lucknow 
commentators. 

5. i.e., annihilation of self and of all phenomenal being, 
regarding self as naught in the presence of the Deity. 



STORY III. The King and his Two Slaves. 

A king purchased two slaves, one extremely handsome, 
and the other very ugly. He sent the first away to the bath, 
and in his absence questioned the other. He told him that 
the first slave had given a very bad account of him, saying 
that he was a thief and a bad character, and asked if it was 
true. The second slave replied that the first was everything 
that was good, his inward qualities corresponding to the 
beauty of his outward appearance, and that whatever he had 
told the king was worthy of credit. The king replied that 
beauty was only an accident, and that, according to the tra- 
dition, accidents "endure only two moments;" that at death 
the animal soul is destroyed, that the text, "Whoso shall 
present himself with beauty shall receive tenfold reward," 
does not refer to outward accidents, but to the "substance," 
the eternal soul. The slave in reply urged that the accidents 
of good works and thoughts will in some way bear fruit in 
the next world, pointing out that thought is always the pre- 



108 
The Masnavi 

cursor of the completed work, as the plan of the architect 
precedes the building, and the gardener's design the perfect 
fruit resulting from his labors. He added that the world is 
only the realized thought of "Universal Reason" The king 
then sent away the slave with whom he had held this dis- 
course, and summoned the other, and told him that his fel- 
low slave had given a bad account of him, and asked what 
he had to say. He replied that his fellow slave was a liar and 
a rascal, and the king then dismissed him, observing that, in 
accordance with the tradition, "Every man is hidden under 
his own tongue," his tongue had betrayed his inner vileness. 
"The safety of a man lies in holding his tongue." 

The apostolical succession of the prophets and the saints. 

With that "brightness of lightning" He kindled their 

souls 
So that Adam acquired knowledge from that light. 
That, which shone from Adam was gathered by Seth, 
Wherefore Adam made him his viceroy when he saw it. 
When Noah received the gift of that lustre, 
He became a soul bearing pearls in the tempest of the 

flood. 
By that light the soul of Abraham was led, 
Without fear he entered Nimrod's fiery furnace. 
When Ishmael sought out that light, 



109 
Book Two 

He meekly laid his head beneath his father's bright knife. 

The soul of David was warmed by its heat, 

Iron became pliable by the force of his weaving. 

When Solomon was nurtured by its fruition, 

The devils became the submissive slaves of his will. 

When Jacob bowed his head to the Divine decree, 

He recovered his sight at the scent of his son. 

When moonlike Joseph saw that brilliant sun, 

He became so expert as he was in interpreting dreams. 

When the staff drew might from the hand of Moses, 

It devoured the realm of Pharaoh at a mouthful. 

When the soul of Jirjis became privy to its light, 

He sacrificed his life seven times, and regained it. 

When Zakhariah boasted of his love for it, 

He ransomed his life in the hollow of the tree. 

When Jonah swallowed a draught from that cup, 

He found repose in the belly of the fish. 

When John the Baptist became filled with its unction, 

He laid his head in the golden charger in ardour for it. 

When Jethro became aware of this exaltation, 

He risked his life to find it. 

Patient Job gave thanks for seven years, 

For in his calamities he saw signs of its approach. 

When Khizr and Elias boasted of gaining it, 

They found the water of life and were no more seen. 

When Jesus. Son of Mary, found that ladder of ascent, 



110 
The Masnavi 

He ascended to the height of the fourth heaven. 
When Muhammad gained that blessed possession, 

o 

In a moment he cleft asunder the disk of the moon. 

When Abu Bakr became the exemplar of that grace, 

He was companion of that Lord, and a 'c faithful witness. 

When 'Omar was enraptured with that beauty, 

Like a mind he discerned true and false. 

When Osman viewed those brilliant sights, 

He diffused light and became "Lord of the two lights." 

When Martaza ('Ali) shined with its reflection, 

He became the "Lion of God" in the soul's domain. 

When his two sons were illumined by this light, 

They became the "pearly earrings of highest heaven;" 

One of them losing his life by poison, 

The other losing his head as he went about his march. 

When Junaid was succoured by the forces of that light, 

His ecstatic states exceeded counting. 

Bayazid saw his way to increased fruition thereof, 

And gained from God the name "Polestar of Gnostics." 

12 

What time King Mansur became victorious, 

He left his throne and hastened to the stake. 

When Karkhi of Karkh became its keeper, 

He became lord of love and of the breath of Jesus. 

Ibrahim son of Adham rode his horse to that point, 

And became king of kings of equity. 

And that Shakik starting from that junction 



Ill 

Book Two 



Became a sun of wit and acute of genius. 
Fazil from a highway robber became a sage of the way, 
When he was regarded with esteem by the King. 
To Bishr Hafi the doctrine, was announced, 
And he set his face towards the desert of inquiry. 
When Zu-1-Ntin became distraught with care for it, 
Egypt (Milk) as sugar became the house of his soul. 
When Sari lost his head in seeking the way thereto, 
His rank was exalted above the seats of the mighty. 
A hundred thousand great (spiritual) kings 
Exalted by this divine light approach the world. 
Their names remain hidden through God's jealousy; 
Every beggar tells not their names. 

Notes: 



1 . Koran vi. 161. 

2. i.e., the Logos as Demiurge. 

3. Koran xxiv. 43. The prophetic inspiration is likened to a 
light handed on from one to another. 

4. Koran xxi. 80. 

5. Koran lxxvii. 96. 

6. Jirjis or St. George is supposed by Muhammadans to be the 
same person as Khizr or Elias. 

7. Zakhariah the prophet is said to have taken refuge from his 
persecutors in the hollow of a tree. 



112 
The Masnavi 

8. Koran liv. 1. 

9. Omar was called "The Discerner." 

10. He bore this name because he had two daughters of 
Muhammad as his wives. 

11. A tradition gives this title to Hasan and Hussain. 

12. Mansur Hallaj, the celebrated Sufi impaled at Bagdad. Shah 
or King was a title often assumed by darveshes. 

13. The "way" means the Sufi doctrines. 

14. All these saints lived in the second and third centuries of the 
Flight. 

15. In the introduction to the Nafahatu-'l Uns, Jami says there 
are always 4000 saints on the earth who are not even known 
to one another. 



STORY IV. The Falcon and the Owls. 

A certain falcon lost his way, and found himself in the 
waste places inhabited by owls. The owls suspected that he 
had come to seize their nests, and all surrounded him to 
make an end of him. The falcon assured them that he had 
no such design as they imputed to him, that his abode was 
on the wrist of the king, and that he did not envy their foul 
habitation. The owls replied that he was trying to deceive 
them, inasmuch as such a strange bird as he could not be a 
favorite of the king. The falcon repeated that he was indeed 



113 
Book Two 

a favorite of the king, and that the king would assuredly 
destroy their houses if they injured him, and proceeded to 
give them some good advice on the folly of trusting to out- 
ward appearances. He said, "It is true I am not homoge- 
neous with the king, but yet the king's light is reflected in 
me, as water becomes homogeneous with earth in plants. I 
am, as it were, the dust beneath the king's feet; and if you 
become like me in this respect, you will be exalted as I am. 
Copy the outward form you behold in me, and perchance 
you will reach the real substance of the king." 

The right use of forms. 

That my outward form may not mislead you, 
Digest my sweet advice before copying me. 
Many are they who have been captured by form, 
Who aimed at form, and found Allah. 
After all, soul is linked to body, 
Though it in nowise resembles the body. 
The power of the light of the eye is mated with fat, 
The light of the heart is hidden in a drop of blood. 
Joy harbors in the kidneys and pain in the liver, 
The lamp of reason in the brains of the head; 
Smell in the nostrils and speech in the tongue, 
Concupiscence in the flesh and courage in the heart. 
These connections are not without a why and a how, 



114 
The Masnavi 

But reason is at a loss to understand the how. 
Universal Soul had connection with Partial Soul, 
Which thence conceived a pearl and retained it in its 

bosom. 
From that connection, like Mary, 
Soul became pregnant of a fair Messiah; 
Not that Messiah who walked upon earth and water, 
But that Messiah who is higher than space. 
Next, as Soul became pregnant by the Soul of souls, 
So by the former Soul did the world become pregnant; 
Then the World brought forth another world, 
And of this last are brought forth other worlds. 
Should I reckon them in my speech till the last day 
I should fail to tell the total of these resurrections. 

Notes: 

1. This is a figurative account of the emanations of Absolute 
Being, whereby the world of phenomena is constituted (see 
Gulshan i Raz, p. 21, note, and p. 66). 

2. i.e., the spirit of the Prophet Muhammad, whom the Sufis 
identify with the Primal Soul. 

3. Continually is creation born again in a new creation" 
(Gulshan i Raz, p. 66). By constant effluxes from Absolute 
Being the world of phenomena is every moment renewed. 



115 
Book Two 

STORY V. The Thirsty Man who threw Bricks into the 
Water. 

A thirsty man discovered a tank of water, but could not 
drink of it because it was surrounded by a high wall. He 
took some of the bricks off the top of the wall and cast them 
over it into the water. The water cried out, "What advantage 
do you gain by doing this?" He made answer, "The first 
advantage is this, that I hear your voice; and the second, 
that the more bricks I pull off the wall, the nearer I 
approach to you." The moral is, that so long as the wall of 
the body intervenes, we cannot reach the water of life. The 
abasement of the body brings men nearer to union with the 
Deity. Destroy, therefore, the fleshly lusts which war against 
the soul. Then follows another parable to illustrate the folly 
of procrastination in this important matter. 

"It was not ye who shot, but God shot; and 
those arrows were God's not yours". 

'Tis God's light that illumines the senses' light, 

That is the meaning of "Light upon light." 

The senses' light draws us earthwards, 

God's light carries us heavenwards. 

As objects of sense are of base condition, 

God's light is an ocean, and the senses' light a dewdrop. 



116 
The Masnavi 

But that light which is "upon this light" is not seen, 
Save through signs and holy discourses. 
Since the senses' light is gross and dense, 
It lies hidden in the black pupil of the eye. 
When you cannot see the senses' light with the eye, 
How can you see with the eye the Light of the mind? 
As the senses' light is hidden in these gross veils, 
Must not that Light which is pure be also hidden? 
Like the senses, this world is ruled by a hidden Power. 
It confesses its impotence before that hidden Power, 
Which sometimes exalts it and sometimes lays it low, 
Sometimes makes it dry and sometimes moist. 
The hand is hidden, yet we see the pen writing; 
The horse is galloping, yet the rider is hid from view. 
The arrow speeds forth, yet the bow is not seen; 
Souls are seen, the Soul of souls (God) is hidden. 
Break not the arrow, for it is the arrow of the King 
Yea, it is an arrow from the bow of Wisdom. 
"Ye shot not when ye shot," was said by God; 
God's action has predominance over all actions. 
Break your own passion, break not that arrow, 
The eye of passion takes milk to be blood. 
Kiss that arrow and bear it to the King, 
Yea, though it be stained with your own blood. 
Whatsoever is seen is weak and base and impotent; 
What is hidden is equally fierce and headstrong. 
We are the captured game; who is the snare? 



117 
Book Two 

We are the balls; where is the bat? 

He tears and mends; who is this tailor? 

He fans and kindles the flame; who is this kindler? 

At one time He makes the faithful one an infidel, 

At another He makes the atheist a devotee! 

Next comes an anecdote of a dirty man who refused to 
bathe because he was ashamed to go into the water, with the 
moral that "Shame hinders religion;" and then another of 
Zu'l Nun, a celebrated Egyptian Sufi of the third century 
A.H. Zu'l Nun appeared to his ignorant friends to be mad, 
and they accordingly confined him in a madhouse. After a 
time they thought that he was not really mad, but had 
feigned madness for some deep purpose, and they went to the 
madhouse to inquire into the state of his health. When they 
arrived there, Zu'l Nun asked them who they were, and they 
answered that they were his devoted friends, who were now 
convinced that the story of his being mad was a calumny. Zu'l 
Nun jumped up and drove them away with sticks and stones, 
saying that true friendship would have been manifested in 
sharing his troubles, even as pure gold is tried by fire. 

Notes: 

1. Koran viii. 17, meaning, "God is the Fa'il i Hakiki, or Only 
Real Agent." 

2. Koran xxiv. 35. 



118 
The Masnavi 

3. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, vol. ii. pp. 379 and 418, gives 
two proverbs - one, "Shame is a part of religion;" and the 
other, "Shame hinders getting a livelihood." 



STORY VI. Luqman's Master examines him and discovers 
his Acuteness. 

Luqman the Sage, who is sometimes identified with 
Esop, and sometimes with the nephew of the prophet. Job, 
though "gifted with wisdom by God," was a slave. His mas- 
ter, however, discovered his worth, and became extremely 
attached to him, so that he never received any delicacy with- 
out giving Luqman a share of it. One day, having received a 
watermelon, he gave Luqman the best part of it, and 
Luqman devoured it with such apparent relish that his mas- 
ter was tempted to taste it. To his surprise he found it very 
bitter, and asked Luqman why he had not told him of this. 
Luqman replied that it was not for him, who lived on his 
master's bounty, to complain if he now and then received 
disagreeable things at his hands. Thus, though to outward 
appearance a slave, Luqman showed himself to be a lord. 

Love endures hardships at the hands of the Beloved. 

Through love bitter things seem sweet, 
Through love bits of copper are made gold. 



119 
Book Two 

Through love dregs taste like pure wine, 

Through love pains are as healing balms. 

Through love thorns become roses, 

And through love vinegar becomes sweet wine. 

Through love the stake becomes a throne, 

Through love reverse of fortune seems good fortune. 

Through love a prison seems a rose bower, 

Without love a grate full of ashes seems a garden. 

Through love burning fire is pleasing light, 

Through love the Devil becomes a Houri. 

Through love hard stones become soft as butter, 

Without love soft wax becomes hard iron. 

Through love grief is as joy, 

Through love Ghouls turn into angels. 

Through love stings are as honey, 

Through love lions are harmless as mice. 

Through love sickness is health, 

Through love wrath is as mercy. 

Through love the dead rise to life, 

Through love the king becomes a slave. 

Even when an evil befalls you, have due regard; 

Regard well him who does you this ill turn. 

The sight which regards the ebb and flow of good and ill 

Opens a passage for you from misfortune to happiness. 

Thence you see the one state moves you into the other, 

One opposite state generating its opposite in exchange. 

So long as you experience not fears after joys, 



120 
The Masnavi 

How can you look for pleasures after disgusts? 

While ye fear the doom of the angel on the left hand, 

Men hope for the bliss of the angel on the right. 

May you gain two wings! A fowl with only one wing 

Is impotent to fly, O well-intentioned one! 

Now either permit me to hold my peace altogether, 

Or give me leave to explain the whole matter. 

And if you dislike this and forbid that, 

Who can tell what your desire is? 

You must have the soul of Abraham in order with light 

To see the mansions of Paradise in the fire. 

Step by step he ascended above sun and moon, 

And so lagged not below, as a ring that fastens a door. 

Since the "Friend of God" ascended above the heavens, 

And said, "I love not Gods that set;" 

So this world of the body is a breeder of misconceptions 

In all who have not fled from lust. 

Notes: 

1. See Koran xxxi. Another anecdote of his wit occurs in Book 
I. 

2. The doctrine of Heraclitus, that opposite states generate one 
another, is discussed by Jelaludin in a passage quoted in 
Lumsden's Grammar, ii. 323, and is mentioned in the Phado 
and the Nicomachean Ethics. 



121 
Book Two 

3. An anacoluthon (see Koran i. 16). 

4. The two wings are hope and fear, both of which are needed 
to guide men's religious flight (see Book III. on "Probability 
the guide of life"). 

5. Koran vi. 77. 



STORY VII. Moses and the Shepherd. 

Next follows an anecdote of Bilkis, Queen of Sheba, 
whose reason was enlightened by the counsels of the 
Hoopoo sent to her by King Solomon. Outward sense is as 
opposed to true reason as Abu Jahl was to Muhammad; and 
when the outward senses are replaced by the true inner rea- 
son, man sees that the body is only foam, and the heart the 
limitless ocean. Afterwards comes an anecdote of a philoso- 
pher who was struck blind for cavilling at the verse, "What 
think ye? If at early morn your waters shall have sunk away, 
who will then give you clear running water?" This is suc- 
ceeded by the story of Moses and the shepherd. Moses once 
heard a shepherd praying as follows: "O God, show me 
where thou art, that I may become. Thy servant. I will clean 
Thy shoes and comb Thy hair, and sew Thy clothes, and 
fetch Thee milk." When Moses heard him praying in this 
senseless manner, he rebuked him, saying, "O foolish one, 
though your father was a Mosalman, you have become an 



122 
The Masnavi 

infidel. God is a Spirit, and needs not such gross ministra- 
tions as, in your ignorance, you suppose." The shepherd was 
abashed at his rebuke, and tore his clothes and fled away 
into the desert. Then a voice from heaven was heard, saying, 
"O Moses, wherefore have you driven away my servant? 
Your office is to reconcile my people with me, not to drive 
them away from me. I have given to each race different 
usages and forms of praising and adoring me. I have no 
need of their praises, being exalted above all such needs. I 
regard not the words that are spoken, but the heart that 
offers them. I do not require fine words, but a burning 
heart. Men's ways of showing devotion to me are various, 
but so long as the devotions are genuine, they are accepted." 

Religious forms indifferent. 

A voice came from God to Moses, 

"Why hast thou sent my servant away? 

Thou hast come to draw men to union with me, 

Not to drive them far away from me. 

So far as possible, engage not in dissevering; 

'The thing most repugnant to me is divorce.' 

To each person have I allotted peculiar forms, 

To each have I given particular usages. 

What is praiseworthy in thee is blameable in him, 

What is poison for thee is honey for him. 



123 
Book Two 

What is good in him is bad in thee, 

What is fair in him is repulsive in thee. 

I am exempt from all purity and impurity, 

I need not the laziness or alacrity of my people. 

I created not men to gain a profit from them, 

But to shower my beneficence upon them. 

In the men of Hind the usages of Hind are praiseworthy, 

In the men of Sind those of Sind. 

I am not purified by their praises, 

'Tis they who become pure and shining thereby. 

I regard not the outside and the words, 

I regard the inside and the state of heart. 

I look at the heart if it be humble, 

Though the words may be the reverse of humble. 

Because the heart is substance, and words accidents, 

Accidents are only a means, substance is the final cause. 

How long wilt thou dwell on words and superficialities? 

A burning heart is what I want; consort with burning! 

Kindle in thy heart the flame of love, 

And burn up utterly thoughts and fine expressions. 

O Moses! the lovers of fair rites are one class, 

They whose hearts and souls burn with love are another. 

Lovers must burn every moment, 

As tax and tithe are levied on a ruined village. 

If they speak amiss, call them not sinners; 

If a martyr be stained with blood, wash it not away. 



124 
The Masnavi 

Blood is better than water for martyrs, 

This fault is better than a thousand correct forms. 

No need to turn to the Ka'ba when one is in it, 

And divers have no need of shoes. 

One does not take a drunken man as a guide on the way, 

Nor speak of darns to torn garments. 

The sect of lovers is distinct from all others, 

Lovers have a religion and a faith of their own. 

Though the ruby has no stamp, what matters it? 

Love is fearless in the midst of the sea of fear. 

Beware, if thou offerest praises or thanksgivings, 

And know them to be even as the babble of that shepherd; 

Though thy praises be better compared with his, 

Yet in regard to God they are full of defects. 

How long wilt thou say, 'They obscure the truth, 

For it is not such as they fancy'? 

Thy own prayers are accepted only through mercy, 

They are suffered as the prayers of an impure woman. 

If her prayers are made impure by the flow of blood, 

Thine are stained with metaphors and similitudes. 

Blood is impure, yet its stain is removed by water; 

But that impurity of ignorance is more lasting, 

Seeing that without the blessed water of God 

It is not banished from the man who is subject to it. 

O that thou wouldst turn thy face to thy own prayers, 



125 
Book Two 

And become cognizant of the meaning of thy ejaculations, 
And say, Ah! my prayers are as defective as my being; 

requite me good for evil!'" 

Moses questions God as to the reason of the flourishing state 
of the wicked. 

Moses said, "O beneficent Creator, 

With whom a moment's remembrance is as long ages, 

1 see Thy plan distorted in this world of earth and water; 
My heart, like the angel's, feels a difficulty thereat. 
With what object hast thou framed this plan, 

And sowed therein the seeds of evil? 

Why hast Thou kindled the fire of violence and wrong? 

Why burnt up mosques and them who worship therein? 

Paradise is attached to requirements unpleasant to us, 
Hell is attached to things flattering our lusts. 
The branch full of sap is the main fuel of thy fire. 
'They that are burnt with fire are near to Kausar.' 
Whoso is in prison and acquainted with troubles, 
That is in requital for his gluttony and lusts. 
Whoso is in a palace and enjoying wealth, 
That is in reward for toils and troubles. 
Whoso is seen enjoying uncounted gold and silver, 
Know that he strove patiently to acquire it. 



126 
The Masnavi 

He, whose soul is exempt from natural conditions, 
And who possesses the power of overriding causes, 
Can see without causes, like eyes that pierce night; 
But thou, who art dependent on sense attend to causes. 

Having left Jesus, thou cherishest an ass (lust), 

And art perforce excluded, like an ass; 

The portion of Jesus is knowledge and wisdom, 

Not so the portion of an ass, O asinine one! 

Thou pitiest thine ass when it complains; 

So art thou ignorant, thy ass makes thee asinine. 

Keep thy pity for Jesus, not for the ass, 

Make not thy lust to vanquish thy reason. 

Leave thy natural lusts to whine and howl, 

Tear thee from them, escape that snare of the soul! 

Notes: 

1. Koran lxvii. 30. 

2. A tradition. 

3. A saying of the Prophet. 



STORY VIII. The Man who made a Pet of a Bear. 



A kind man, seeing a serpent overcoming a bear, went to 
the bear's assistance, and delivered him from the serpent. 



127 
Book Two 

The bear was so sensible of the kindness the man had done 
him that he followed him about wherever he went, and 
became his faithful slave, guarding him from everything 
that might annoy him. One day the man was lying asleep, 
and the bear, according to his custom, was sitting by him 
and driving off the flies. The flies became so persistent in 
their annoyances that the bear lost patience, and seizing the 
largest stone he could find, dashed it at them in order to 
crush them utterly; but unfortunately the flies escaped, and 
the stone lighted upon the sleeper's face and crushed it. The 
moral is, "Do not make friends with fools." In the course of 
this story occur anecdotes of a blind man, of Moses rebuk- 
ing the worshippers of the calf, and of the Greek physician 
Galen and a madman. 

He who needs mercy finds it. 

Doing kindness is the game and quarry of good men, 

A good man seeks in the world only pains to cure. 

Wherever there is a pain there goes the remedy, 

Wherever there is poverty there goes relief. 

Seek not water, only show you are thirsty, 

That water may spring up all around you. 

That you may hear the words, "The Lord gives them to 

drink," 
Be athirst! Allah knows what is best for you. 
Seek you the water of mercy? Be downcast, 



128 
The Masnavi 

And straightway drink the wine of mercy to intoxication. 
Mercy is called down by mercy to the last. 
Withhold not, then, mercy from any one, O son! 

If of yourself you cannot journey to the Ka'ba, 

Represent your helplessness to the Reliever. 

Cries and groans are a powerful means, 

And the All-Merciful is a mighty nurse. 

The nurse and the mother keep excusing themselves, 

Till their child begins to cry. 

In you too has God created infant needs; 

When they cry out, their milk is brought to them; 

God said, "Call on God;" continue crying, 

So that the milk of His love may boil up. 

Moses and the worshipper of the calf. 

Moses said to one of those full of vain imaginations, 

"O malevolent one, through error and heresy 

You entertain a hundred doubts as to my prophethood, 

Notwithstanding these proofs, and my holy character. 

You have seen thousands of miracles done by me, 

Yet they only multiply your doubts and cavils. 

Through doubts and evil thoughts you are in a strait, 

You speak despitefully of my prophethood. 

I brought the host out of the Red Sea before all men, 

That ye might escape the oppression of the Egyptians. 



129 
Book Two 

For forty years meat and drink came from heaven, 

And water sprang from the rock at my prayer. 

My staff became a mighty serpent in my hand, 

Water became blood for my ill-conditioned enemy. 

The staff became a snake, and my hand bright as the sun; 

From the reflection of that light the sun became a star. 

Have not these incidents, and hundreds more like them, 

Banished these doubts from you, O cold-hearted one? 

The calf lowed through magic, 

And you bowed down to it, saying, 'Thou art my God.' 

The golden calf lowed; but what did it say, 

That the fools should feel all this devotion to it? 

You have seen many more wondrous works done by me, 

But where is the base man who accepts the truth? 

What is it that charms vain men but vanity? 

What else pleases the foolish but folly? 

Because each kind is charmed by its own kind, 

Does a cow ever seek the lion? 

Did the wolf show love to Joseph, 

Or only fraud upon fraud with a view to devour him? 

True, if it lose his wolf-like nature it becomes a friend; 

Even as the dog of the cave became a son of man. 

When good Abu Bakr saw Muhammad, 

He recognized his truth, saying, 'This one is true;' 

When Abu Bakr caught the perfume of Muhammad, 

He said, 'This is no false one.' 



130 
The Masnavi 

But Abu Jahl, who was not one of the sympathizers, 
Saw the moon split asunder, yet believed not. 
If from a sympathizer, to whom it is well known, 
I withhold the truth, still 'tis not hidden from him; 
But he who is ignorant and without sympathy, 
However much I show him the truth, he sees it not. 
The mirror of the heart must needs be polished 
Before you can distinguish fair and foul therein." 

Notes: 

1 . Anwari Suhaili, i. 27. 

2. Koran lxxvi. 21. 

3. Koran xvii. 110. 

4. See Koran xx. 90. 

5. Koran xii. 17. 

6. Koran xviii. 17. 



STORY IX. The Gardener and the Three Friends. 

A voice came from heaven to Moses, saying, "O Moses 
why didst thou not visit me when I was sick?" Moses 
inquired the meaning of this dark saying, and the answer 
was, "When one of God's saints is sick, God regards his 
sickness as His own; and, therefore, he who desires to hold 



131 
Book Two 

companionship with God must not forsake the saints." 
This is illustrated by a story of a gardener who saw three 
friends walking in his garden, and making free with his 
fruit. Knowing he could not prevail against them while they 
remained united, he contrived by tricks to separate them, 
and then proceeded to chastise them one by one. And this 
caused one of them to make the reflection that he had acted 
very foolishly in deserting his friends. 

Notes: 

1 . Cp. Matthew xxv. 40. 



STORY X. Bayazid and the Saint. 

The celebrated Sufi, Abu Yazid or Bayazid of Bastam, in 
Khorasan, who lived in the third century of the Flight, was 
once making a pilgrimage to Mecca, and visiting all the 
"Pillars of insight" who lived m the various towns that lay 
on his route. At last he discovered the "Khizr of the age" in 
the person of a venerable Darvesh, with whom he held the 
following conversation: 

The Sage said, "Whither are you going, O Bayazid? 
Where will you bring your caravan to a halt?" 



132 
The Masnavi 

Bayazid replied, "At dawn I start for the Ka'ba." 
Quoth the Sage, "What provision for the way have you?" 
He answered, "I have two hundred silver dirhams; 
See them tied up tightly in the corner of my cloak." 
The Sage said, "Circumambulate me seven times; 
Count this better than circumambulating the Ka'ba; 
And as for the dirhams, give them to me, O liberal one, 
And know you have finished your course and obtained 

your wish, 
You have made the pilgrimage and gained the life to come, 
You have become pure, and that in a moment of time. 
Of a truth that is God which your soul sees in me, 
For God has chosen me to be His house. 
Though the Ka'ba is the house of His grace and favors, 
Yet my body too is the house of His secret. 
Since He made that house He has never entered it, 
But none but That Living One enters this house; 
When you have seen me you have seen God, 
And have circumambulated the veritable Ka'ba. 
To serve me is to worship and praise God; 
Think not that God is distinct from me. 
Open clear eyes and look upon me, 
That you may behold the light of God in a mortal. 
Tho Beloved once called the Ka'ba 'My house,' 
But has said to me 'O my servant' seventy times; 
O Bayazid, you have found the Ka'ba, 



133 
Book Two 

You have found a hundred precious blessings." 

Bayazid gave heed to these deep sayings, 

And placed them as golden earrings in his ears. 

Then follow anecdotes of the Prophet paying a visit to 
one of his disciples who lay sick, of Shaikh Bahlol, nick- 
named "The Madman," who was a favorite at the court of 
Harunu-'r-Rashid, and of the people of Moses. 

The sweet uses of adversity. 

The sick man said, "Sickness has brought me this boon. 

That this Prince (Muhammad) has come to me this morn, 

So that health and strength may return to me 

From the visit of this unparalleled King. 

O blessed pain and sickness and fever! 

O welcome weariness and sleeplessness by night! 

Lo! God of His bounty and favor 

Has sent me this pain and sickness in my old age; 

He has given me pain in the back, that I may not fail 

To spring up out of my sleep at midnight; 

That I may not sleep all night like the cattle, 

God in His mercy has sent me these pains. 

At my broken state the pity of kings has boiled up, 

And hell is put to silence by their threats!" 



134 
The Masnavi 

Pain is a treasure, for it contains mercies; 

The kernel is soft when the rind is scraped off. 

O brother, the place of darkness and cold 

Is the fountain of life and the cup of ecstasy. 

So also is endurance of pain and sickness and disease. 

For from abasement proceeds exaltation. 

The spring seasons are hidden in the autumns, 

And autumns are charged with springs; flee them not. 

Consort with grief and put up with sadness, 

Seek long life in your own death! 

Since 'tis bad, whatever lust says on this matter 

Heed it not, its business is opposition. 

But act contrary thereto, for the prophets 

Have laid this injunction upon the world. 

Though it is right to take counsel in affairs, 

That you may have less to regret in the upshot; 

The prophets have labored much 

To make the world revolve on this pivot stone; 

But, in order to destroy the people, lust desires 

To make them go astray and lose their heads; 

The people say, 'With whom shall we take counsel?' 

The prophets answer, 'With the reason of your chief 

Again they say, 'Suppose a child or a woman enter, 

Who lacks reason and clear judgment; ' 

They reply, 'Take counsel with them, 

And act contrary to what they advise.' 



135 
Book Two 

Know your lust to be woman, and worse than woman; 

Woman is partial evil, lust universal evil. 

If you take counsel with your lust, 

See you act contrary to what that base one advises. 

Even though it enjoin prayers and fasting, 

It is treacherously laying a snare for you.' 

You must abandon and ignore your own knowledge, 

And dip your hand in the dish of abnegation of knowledge. 

Whatever seems profitable, flee from it, 

Drink poison and spill the water of life. 

Contemn whatever praises you, 

Lend to paupers your wealth and profits! 

Quit your sect and be a subject of aversion, 

Cast away name and fame and seek disgrace!" 

God the Author of good and evil. 

If you seek the explanation of God's love and favor, 
In connection therewith read the chapter "Brightness." 
And if you say evil also proceeds from Him, 
Yet what damage is that to His perfection? 
To send that evil is one of His perfections. 
I will give you an illustration, O arrogant one; 
The heavenly Artist paints His pictures of two sorts, 
Fair pictures and pictures the reverse of fair. 
Joseph he painted fair and made him beautiful; 



136 
The Masnavi 

He also painted ugly pictures of demons and afrits. 
Both sorts of pictures are of His workmanship, 
They proceed not from His imperfection, but His skill, 
That the perfection of His wisdom may be shown, 
And the gainsayers of His art be put to shame. 
Could He not paint ugly things He would lack art, 
And therefore He creates Guebers as well as Moslems. 
Thus, both infidelity and faith bear witness to Him, 
Both alike bow down before His almighty sway. 
But know, the faithful worship Him willingly, 
For they seek and aim at pleasing Him; 
While Guebers worship Him unwillingly, 
Their real aim and purpose being quite otherwise. 

Evil itself is turned into good for the good. 

The Prophet said to that sick man, 

"Pray in this wise and allay your difficulties; 

'Give us good in the house of our present world, 

And give us good in the house of our next world. 

Make our path pleasant as a garden, 

And be Thou, O Holy One, our goal!'" 

The faithful will say on the last day, "O King! 
Was not Hell on the route all of us traveled? 
Did not faithful as well as infidels pass through it? 



137 
Book Two 

Yet on our way we perceived not the smoke of the fire; 
Nay, it seemed Paradise and the mansion of the blessed. 
Then the King will answer, "That green garden, 
As it appeared to you on your passage through it, 
Was indeed Hell and the place of dread torment; 
Yet for you it became a garden green with trees. 
Since you have labored to make hellish lusts, 
And the 'fire of pride that courts destruction, 
To make these, I say, pure and clean, 
And, to please God, have quenched those fires, 
So that the fire of lust, that erst breathed flame, 
Has become a holy garden and a guiding light, 
Since you have turned the fire of wrath to meekness, 
And the darkness of ignorance to shining knowledge, 
Since you have turned the fire of greed into bounty, 
And the vile thorns of malice into a rose-garden; 
Since you have quenched all these fires of your own 
For my sake, so that those poisons are now pure sweets; 
Since you have made fiery lust as a verdant garden, 
And have sowed therein the seed of fidelity, 
So that nightingales of prayer and praise 
Ever warble sweetly around this garden; 
Since you have responded to the call of God, 
And have drawn water out of the hell of lust, 
For this cause my hell also, for your behoof, 
Becomes a verdant garden and yields leaves and fruit." 



138 
The Masnavi 

What is the recompense of well-doing, O son? 

It is kindness and good treatment and rich requital. 

Have ye not said, "We are victims, 

Mere nothings before eternal Being? 

If we are drunkards or madmen, 

'Tis that Cup-bearer and that Cup which make us so. 

We bow down our heads before His edict and ordinance, 

We stake precious life to gain His favor. 

While the thought of the Beloved fills our hearts, 

All our work is to do Him service and spend life for Him. 

Wherever He kindles His destructive torch, 

Myriads of lovers' souls are burnt therewith. 

The lovers who dwell within the sanctuary 

Are moths burnt with the torch of the Beloved's face." 

O heart haste thither, for God will shine upon you, 

And seem to you a sweet garden instead of a terror. 

He will infuse into your soul a new soul, 

So as to fill you, like a goblet, with wine. 

Take up your abode in His soul! 

Take up your abode in heaven, O bright full moon! 

Like the heavenly Scribe, He will open your heart's book 

That He may reveal mysteries unto you. 

Abide with your Friend, since you have gone astray, 

Strive to be a full moon; you are now a fragment thereof. 

Wherefore this shrinking of the part from its whole? 



139 
Book Two 

Why this association with its foes? 

Behold Genus become Species in due course, 

Behold secrets become manifest through his light! 

So long as woman-like you swallow blandishments, 

How, O wise man, can you get relief from false flatteries? 

These flatteries and fair words and deceits (of lust) 

You take, and swallow, just like women. 

But the reproaches and the blows of Darveshes 

Are really better for you than the praises of sinners. 

Take the light blows of Darveshes, not the honey of sinners, 

And become, by the fortune of good, good yourself. 

Because from them the robe of good fortune is gained, 

In the asylum of the spirit blood becomes life. 

Notes: 

1. Alluding to the Hadis: "Heaven and earth contain me not, 
but the heart of my faithful servant contains me." 

2. Freytag quotes a saying of 'Omar, "A fool may indicate the 
right course" (Arabum Proverbia, i. p. 566). 

3. The law defining the right course. 

4. Koran xciii. : "By the noonday brightness, and by the night 
when it darkeneth, thy Lord hath not forsaken thee nor 
been displeased." 

5. "O Lord, give us good in this world and good in the next, 
and save us from the torment of the fire." (Koran ii. 197). 



140 
The Masnavi 

6. i.e., to annihilation of self in God, as a moth in the flame. 

7. Atarid or Mercury. 



STORY XL Mo'avia and Iblis. 

Mo'avia, the first of the Ommiad Khalifas, was one day 
lying asleep in his palace, when he was awakened by a 
strange man. Mo'avia asked him who he was, and he replied 
that he was Iblis. Mo'avia then asked him why he had awak- 
ened him, and lblis replied that the hour of prayer was 
come, and he feared Mo'avia would be late. Mo'avia 
answered, "Nay! it could never have been your intention to 
direct me in the right way. How can I trust a thief like you 
to guard my interests?" Iblis answered, "Remember that I 
was bred up as an angel of light, and that I cannot quite 
abandon my original occupation. You may travel to Rome 
or Cathay, but still you retain the love of your fatherland. I 
still retain my love of God, who fed me when I was young; 
nay, even though I revolted from Him, that was only from 
jealousy (of Adam), and jealousy proceeds from love, not 
from denial of God. I played a game of chess with God at 
His own desire, and though I was utterly checkmated and 
ruined, in my ruin I still experience God's blessings." 

Mo'avia answered, "What you say is not credible. Your 
words are like the decoy calls of a fowler, which resemble the 



141 
Book Two 

voices of the birds, and so lure them to destruction. You 
have caused the destruction of hundreds of mortals, such as 
the people of Noah, the tribe of 'Ad, the family of Lot, 
Nimrod, Pharaoh, Abu Jahl, and so on." 

Iblis retorted, "You are mistaken if you suppose me to be 
the cause of all the evil you mention. I am not God, that I 
should be able to make good evil, or fair foul. Mercy and 
vengeance are twin divine attributes, and they generate the 
good and evil seen in all earthly things. I am, therefore, not 
to blame for the existence of evil, as I am only a mirror, 
which reflects the good and evil existing in the objects pre- 
sented to it." 

Mo'avia then prayed to God to guard him against the 
sophistries of lblis, and again adjured lblis to cease his argu- 
ments and tell plainly the reason why he had awakened him. 
Iblis, instead of answering, continued to justify himself, say- 
ing how hard it was that men and women should blame him 
when they did anything wrong, instead of blaming their own 
evil lusts. Mo'avia, in reply, reproached him with concealing 
the truth, and ultimately brought him to confess that the 
true reason why he had awakened him was this, that if he 
had overslept himself, and so missed the hour of prayer, he 
would have felt deep sorrow and have heaved many sighs, 
and each of these sighs would, in the sight of God, have 
counted for as many as two hundred ordinary prayers. 



142 
The Masnavi 

The value of sighs. 

A certain man was going into the mosque, 

Just as another was coming out. 

He inquired of him what had occurred to the meeting, 

That the people were coming out of the mosque so soon. 

The other told him that the Prophet 

Had concluded the public prayers and mysteries. 

"Whither go you," said he, "O foolish one, 

Seeing the Prophet has already given the blessing?" 

The first heaved a sigh, and its smoke ascended; 

That sigh yielded a perfume of his heart's blood. 

The other, who came from the mosque, said to him, 

"Give me that sigh, and take my prayers instead." 

The first said, "I give it, and take your prayers." 

The other took that sigh with a hundred thanks. 

He went his way with deep humility and contrition, 

As a hawk who had ascended in the track of the falcon. 

That night, as ho lay asleep, he heard a voice from heaven, 

"Thou hast bought the water of life and healing; 

The worth of what thou hast chosen and possessed 

Equals that of all the people's accepted prayers." 

To illustrate the treachery of wolves in sheep's clothing, - 
of Satans rebuking sin and preaching religion - an anecdote 
is told of a master of a house who caught a thief, but was 
induced to let him escape by the stratagem of the thief's 



143 
Book Two 

confederate, who cried that he had got the real thief else- 
where. Apropos of the same theme, the poet next relates the 
story of "those who built a mosque for mischief," as record- 
ed in the Koran. The tribe of Bani Ganim built a mosque, 
and invited the Prophet to dedicate it. The Prophet, how- 
ever, discovered that their real motive was jealousy of the 
tribe of Bani Amru lbn Auf, and of the mosque at Kuba, 
near Medina, and a treacherous understanding with the 
Syrian monk Abu Amir, and therefore he refused their 
request, and ordered the mosque to be razed to the ground. 



Wisdom the believer's lost 



My people adopt my law without obeying it, 

They take that coin without assaying it. 

The Koran's wisdom is like the "believer's lost camel,' 

Every one is certain his camel is lost. 

You have lost your camel and seek it diligently; 

Yet how will you find it if you know not your own? 

What was lost? Was it a female camel that you lost? 

It escaped from your hand, and you are in a maze. 

The caravan is come to be loaded, 

Your camel is vanished from the midst of it. 

You run here and there, your mouth parched with heat; 

The caravan moves on, and night approaches. 

Your goods lie on the ground in a dangerous road, 

You hurry after your camel in all directions. 



144 
The Masnavi 

You cry "O Moslems, who has seen a camel, 

Which escaped from its stable this morning? 

To him who shall give me news of my camel 

I will give a reward of so many dirhems." 

You go on seeking news of your camel from every one, 

And every lewd fellow flatters you with a fresh rumor, 

Saying, "I saw a camel; it went this way; 

'Twas red, and it went towards this pasture." 

Another says, "Its ear was cropped." 

Another says, "Its cloth was embroidered." 

Another that it had only one eye, 

Another that it had lost its hair from mange. 

To gain the reward every base fellow 

Mentions a hundred marks without any foundation. 

All false doctrines contain an element of truth. 

Just so every one in matters of doctrine 

Gives a different description of the hidden subject. 

A philosopher expounds it in one way, 

And a critic at once refutes his propositions. 

A third censures both of them; 

A fourth spends his life in traducing the others. 

Every one mentions indications of this road, 

In order to create an impression that he has gone it. 

This truth and that truth cannot be all true, 

And yet all of them are not entirely astray in error. 



145 
Book Two 

Because error occurs not without some truth, 

Fools buy base coins from their likeness to real coins. 

If there were no genuine coins current in the world, 

How could coiners succeed in passing false coins? 

If there were no truth, how could falsehood exist? 

Falsehood derives its plausibility from truth. 

"Tls the desire of right that makes men buy wrong; 

Let poison be mixed with sugar, and they eat it at once. 

If wheat were not valued as sweet and good for food, 

The cheat who shows wheat and sells barley would make 

no profit! 
Say not, then, that all these creeds are false, 
The false ones ensnare hearts by the scent of truth. 
Say not that they are all erroneous fancies, 
There is no fancy in the universe without some truth. 
Truth is the "night of power " hidden amongst other 

nights, 
In order to try the spirit of every night. 
Not every night is that of power, O youth, 
Nor yet is every night quite void of power. 
In the crowd of rag-wearers there is but one Faqir; 
Search well and find out that true one. 
Tell the wary and discerning believer 
To distinguish the king from the beggar. 
If there were no bad goods in the world, 
Every fool might be a skilful merchant; 
For then the hard art of judging goods would be easy. 



146 
The Masnavi 

If there were no faults, one man could judge as well as 

another. 
Again, if all were faulty, skill would be profitless. 
If all wood were common, there would be no aloes. 
He who accepts everything as true is a fool, 
But he who says all is false is a knave. 

Notes: 

1. See Koran xi. 63. 

2. Koran ix. 108. 

3. This is a proverb ascribed to Ali. It means, people are always 
losing wisdom and seeking it like a lost camel (Freytag, 
Arabum Proverbia, i. p. 385). 

4. The night on which the Koran was revealed. 

5. So in the Phaedo, "Many are the wandbearers, but few the 
Mystics." 



STORY XII. The Four Hindustanis who censured one 
another. 

Four Hindustanis went to the mosque to say their 
prayers. Each one duly pronounced the Takbir, and was say- 
ing his prayers with great devotion, when the Mu'azzin hap- 
pened to come in. One of them immediately called out, "O 
Mu'azzin, have you yet called to prayer? It is time to do so." 



147 
Book Two 

Then the second said to the speaker, "Ah! you have spoken 
words unconnected with worship, and therefore, according 
to the Hadis, you have spoiled your prayers." Thereupon 
the third scolded the last speaker, saying, "O simpleton, 
why do you rebuke him? Rather rebuke yourself." Last of 
all, the fourth said, "God be praised that I have not fallen 
into the same ditch as my three companions." The moral is, 
not to find fault with others, but rather, according to the 
proverb, to be admonished by their bad example. Apropos 
of this proverb, a story is told of two prisoners captured by 
the tribe of Ghuz. The Ghuzians were about to put one of 
them to death, to frighten the other, and make him confess 
where the treasure was concealed, when the doomed man 
discovered their object, and said, "O noble sirs, kill my 
companion, and frighten me instead." 

Notes: 

1. Mishkat ul Masabih, by Matthews, i. 205. 

2. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, i. 628. 



STORY XIII. The Old Man and the Physician. 

An old man complained to his physician that he suffered 
from headache. The physician replied, "That is caused by 
old age." The old man next complained of a defect in his 



148 
The Masnavi 

sight, and the physician again told him that his malady was 
due to old age. The old man went on to say that he suffered 
from pain in the back, from dyspepsia, from shortness of 
breath, from nervous debility, from inability to walk, and so 
on; and the physician replied that each of these ailments was 
likewise caused by old age. The old man, losing patience, 
said, "O fool, know you not that God has ordained a rem- 
edy for every malady?" The physician answered, "This pas- 
sion and choler are also symptoms of old age. Since all your 
members are weak, you have lost the power of self-control, 
and fly into a passion at every word." 



rinciples always produce bad acts. 



Fools laud and magnify the mosque, 

While they strive to oppress holy men of heart. 

But the former is mere form, the latter spirit and truth. 

The only true mosque is that in the hearts of saints. 

The mosque that is built in the hearts of the saints 

Is the place of worship of all, for God dwells there. 

So long as the hearts of the saints are not afflicted, 

God never destroys the nation. 

Our forefathers lifted their hands against the prophets; 

Seeing their bodies, they took them for ordinary men. 

In you also abide the morals of those men of old; 

How can you avoid fearing that you will act like them? 



149 
Book Two 

The morals of those unthankful ones dwell in you, 
Your urn will not always return unbroken from the well. 
Seeing that all these bad symptoms are seen in you, 
And that you are one with those men, how can you 
escape? 



STORY XIV. The Arab Carrier and the Scholar. 

An Arab loaded his camel with two sacks, filling one with 
wheat and the second with sand, in order to balance the first. 
As he was proceeding on his way he met a certain tradition- 
monger, who questioned him about the contents of his 
sacks. On learning that one contained nothing but sand, he 
pointed out that the object might be attained much better 
by putting half the wheat in one sack and half in the other. 
On hearing this, the Arab was so struck by his sagacity that 
he conceived a great respect for him, and mounted him on 
his camel. Then he said, "As you possess such great wisdom. 
I presume that you are a king or a Vazir, or at least a very rich 
and powerful noble." The theologian, replied, "On the con- 
trary. I am a very poor man; all the riches my learning has 
brought me are weariness and headaches, and I know not 
where to look for a loaf of bread." The Arab said, "In that 
case get, off my camel and go your way, and suffer me to go 
mine, for I see your learning brings ill luck." The moral of 



150 
The Masnavi 

the story is the worthlessness of mere human knowledge, 
and its inferiority to the divine knowledge proceeding from 
inspiration. This thesis is further illustrated by an account of 
the mighty works which were done by the saint Ibrahim bin 
Adham, through the divine knowledge that God had given 
him. Ibrahim was originally prince of Balkh, but renounced 
his kingdom and became a saint. One day he was sitting by 
the shore mending his cloak, when one of his former sub- 
jects passed by and marvelled to see him engaged in such a, 
mean occupation. The saint at once, by inspired knowledge, 
read his thoughts, and thus corrected his false impressions. 
He took the needle with which he was mending, his cloak 
and cast it into the sea. Then with a loud voice he cried out, 
"O needle rise again from the midst of the sea and come 
back again into my hands." Without a moment's delay thou- 
sands of fishes rose to the surface of the sea, each bearing in 
its mouth a golden needle, and cried out, "O Shaikh, take 
these needles of God!" Ibrahim then turned to the noble, 
saying, "Is not the kingdom of the heart better than the con- 
temptible earthly kingdom I formerly possessed? What you 
have just seen is a very trifling sign of my spiritual power as 
it were, a mere leaf plucked to show the beauty of a garden. 
You have now caught the scent of this garden, and it ought 
to attract your soul to the garden itself, for you must know 
that scents have great influence, e.g., the scent of Joseph's 
coat, which restored Jacob's sight, and the scents which 

9 

were loved by the Prophet." 



151 
Book Two 

Notes: 

1. Koran xii. 93. 

2. There is a Hedis: "The Prophet loved perfumes and fair 
women and brightness of eyes in prayer." 



STORY XV. The Man who boasted that God did not punish 
him for his sins, and Jethro's answer to him. 

That person said in the time of Shu'aib (Jethro), 

"God has seen many faults done by me; 

Yea, how many sins and faults of mine has He seen, 

Nevertheless of His mercy He punishes me not." 

God Almighty spake in the ear of Shu'aib, 

Addressing him with an inner voice in answer thereto, 

"Why hast thou said I have sinned so much, 

And God of His mercy has not punished my sins?" 

Thou sayest the very reverse of the truth, O fool! 

Wandering from the way and lost in the desert! 

How many times do I smite thee, and thou knowest not? 

Thou art bound in my chains from head to foot. 

On thy heart is rust on rust collected, 

So thou art blind to mysteries. 

Thy rust, layer on layer, O black kettle! 

Makes the aspect of thy inner parts foul. 

If that smoke touched a new kettle, 



152 
The Masnavi 

It would show the smut, were it only as a grain of barley; 

For everything is made manifest by its opposite, 

In contrast with its whiteness that black shows foul. 

But when the kettle is black, then afterwards 

Who can see on it the impression of the smoke? 

If the blacksmith be a negro, 

His face agrees in color with the smoke. 

But if a man of Rum does blacksmith's work, 

His face becomes grimed by the smoke fumes; 

Then he quickly perceives the impression of his fault, 

So that he wails and cries 'O Allah!' 

When he is stubborn and follows his evil practices, 

He casts dust in the eyes of his discernment. 

He recks not of repentance, and, moreover, that sin 

Becomes dear to his heart, so that he becomes without faith, 

Old shame for sin and calling on God quit him, 

Rust five layers deep settles on his mirror, 

Rust spots begin to gnaw his iron, 

The color in his jewel grows less and less. 

When you write on white paper, 

What is written is read at a glance; 

But when you write on the face of a written page, 

It is not plain, reading it is deceptive; 

For that black is written on the top of other black, 

Both the writings are illegible and senseless. 

Or if, in the third place, you write on the page, 

And then blacken it like an infidel's soul, 



153 
Book Two 

Then what remedy but the aid of the Remedier? 

Despair is copper and sight its elixir. 

Lay your despair before Him, 

That you may escape from pain without medicine." 

When Shu'aib spoke these aphorisms to him, 

From that breath of the soul roses bloomed in his heart, 

His soul heard the revelations of heaven; 

He said, "If He has punished me, where is the sign of it?" 

Shu'aib said, "O Lord, he repels my arguments, 
He seeks for a sign of that punishment." 

The Veiler of sins replied, "I will tell him no secrets, 

Save only one, in order to try him. 

One sign that I punish him is this, 

That he observes obedience and fasting and prayer, 

And devotions and almsgiving, and so on, 

Yet never feels the least expansion of soul. 

He performs the devotions and acts enjoined by law, 

Yet derives not an atom of relish from them. 

Outward devotion is sweet to him, spirit is not sweet, 

Nuts in plenty, but no kernel in any of them. 

Relish is needed for devotions to bear fruit, 

Kernels are needed that seeds may yield trees. 

How can seeds without kernels become trees? 

Form without soul (life) is only a dream." 



154 
The Masnavi 

STORY XVI. The Gluttonous Sufi. 

In a certain convent there lived a Sufi whose conduct gave 
just offence to the brethren. They brought him before their 
Shaikh and thus accused him, "This Sufi has three very bad 
qualities; he babbles exceedingly like a bell, at his meals he 
eats more than twenty men and when he sleeps he is as one 
of the Seven Sleepers." The Shaikh then admonished him, 
insisting on the obligation of keeping to the golden mean; 
and reminding him that even the prophet Moses was once 
rebuked by Khizr for speaking to excess. But the delinquent 
excused himself on the grounds that the mean is relative, 
what is excess in one man being moderation in another, that 
he who is led by the spirit is no longer subject to the out- 
ward law, and that, the "inner voice," which rules such an 
one s conduct, is its own evidence. 

The mean is relative. 

He said, "Though the path of the mean is wisdom, 

Yet is this same mean also relative. 

The water which is insufficient for a camel 

Is like an ocean to a mouse. 

Whoso has four loaves as his daily allowance, 

Whether he eat two or three, he observes the mean. 

But if he eat all four he transgresses the mean, 



155 
Book Two 

A very slave to greed, and voracious as a duck. 

Whoso has an appetite for ten loaves, 

Know, though he eat six, he observes the mean. 

If I have an appetite for fifty loaves, 

While you can manage only six, we are not on a par. 

You are wearied with ten prostrations in prayer, 

Whilst I can endure five hundred. 

Such an one goes barefoot to the Ka'ba, 

Whilst another faints with going to the mosque." 

The ecstatic state which exalts the subject of it above law. 

"At times my state resembles a dream, 

My dreaming seems to them infidelity. 

Know my eyes sleep, but my heart is awake; 

My body, though torpid, is instinct with energy. 

The Prophet said, 'Mine eyes sleep, 

But my heart is awake with the Lord of mankind.' 

Your eyes are awake and your heart fast asleep, 

My eyes are closed, and my heart at the 'open door.' 

My heart has other five senses of its own; 

These senses of my heart view the two worlds. 

Let not a weakling like you censure me, 

What, seems night to you is broad day to me; 

What seems a prison to you is a garden to me. 

Busiest occupation is rest to me. 



156 
The Masnavi 

Your feet are in the mire, to me, mire is rose, 

What to you is funeral wailing is marriage drum to me. 

While I seem on earth, abiding with you in the house, 

I ascend like Saturn to the seventh heaven. 

'Tis not I who companion with you, 'tis my shadow; 

My exaltation transcends your thoughts, 

Because I have transcended thought, 

Yea, I have sped beyond reach of thought. 

I am lord of thought, not overlorded by thought, 

As the builder is lord of the building. 

All creatures are enslaved to thought; 

For this cause are they sad at heart and sorrowful. 

I send myself on an embassy to thought, 

And, at will, spring back again from thought. 

I am as the bird of heaven and thought as the fly, 

How can the fly lend a helping hand to me? 

Whoso has in him a spark of the light of Omnipotence, 
However much he eats, say 'Eat on;' 'tis lawful to him." 

To the spiritual man the "inner voice" is its 
own evidence, and needs no other proof. 

"If you are a true lover of my soul, 

This truth-fraught saying of mine is no vain pretence, 

'Though I talk half the night I am superior to you;' 



157 
Book Two 

And again, 'Fear not the night; here am I, your kinsman. 
These two assertions of mine will both seem true to you 
The moment you recognize the voice of your kinsman. 
Superiority and kinsmanship are both mere assertions, 
Yet both are recognized for truth by men of clear wit. 
The nearness of the voice proves to such an one 
That the voice proceeds from a friend who is near. 
The sweetness of the kinsman's voice, too, O beloved, 
Proves the veracity of that kinsman. 
But the uninspired fool who from ignorance 
Cannot tell the voice of a stranger from a friend's, 
To him the friend's saying seems a vain pretension, 
His ignorance is the material cause of his disbelief. 
To the wise, whose hearts are enlightened, 
The mere sound of that voice proves its truth." 

"When you say to a thirsty man, 'Come quickly; 

This is water in the cup, take and drink it,' 

Does the thirsty man say, 'This is a vain pretension; 

Go, remove yourself from me, O vain pretender, 

Or proceed to give proofs and evidence 

That this is generic water, and concrete water thereof? 

Or when a mother cries to her sucking babe, 

'Come, O son, I am thy mother,' 

Does the babe answer, 'O mother, show a proof 

That I shall find comfort from taking thy milk'? 



158 
The Masnavi 

In the hearts of every sect that has a taste of the truth 
The sight and the voice of prophets work miracles. 
When the prophets raise their cry to the outward ear, 
The souls of each sect bow in devotion within; 
Because never in this world hath the soul's ear 
Heard from any man the like of that cry. 
That poor man in that strange sweet voice 
Recognizes the voice of God, 'Verily I am nigh.'" 

Notes: 

1 . Koran xviii. 77. 

2. "And when my servants ask thee concerning me then will I 
be nigh unto them. I will answer the cry of him that crieth, 
when he crieth unto me." (Koran ii. 182). 



STORY XVII. The Tree of Life. 

The preceding story is followed by a short anecdote of the 
infants of the Virgin Mary and the mother of John the 
Baptist leaping in their mothers' wombs, and in reply to 
matter of fact cavillers and questioners of this anecdote, the 
poet says we must look at its spirit and essential basis rather 
than its outward form. This introduces the story of the tree 
of life. A certain wise man related that in Hindustan there 



159 
Book Two 

was a tree of such wonderful virtue that whosoever ate of its 
fruit lived forever. Hearing this, a king deputed one of his 
courtiers to go in quest of it. The courtier accordingly pro- 
ceeded to Hindustan, and traveled all over that country, 
inquiring of every one he met where this tree was to be 
found. Some of these persons professed their entire igno- 
rance, others joked him, and others gave him false informa- 
tion; and, finally, he had to return to his country with his 
mission unaccomplished. He then, as a last resource, betook 
himself to the sage who had first spoken of the tree, and 
begged for further information about it, and the sage 
replied to him as follows: 

The Shaikh laughed, and said to him, "O friend, 

This is the tree of knowledge, O knowing one; 

Very high, very fine, very expansive, 

The very water of life from the circumfluent ocean. 

Thou hast run after form, O ill-informed one, 

Wherefore thou lackest the fruit of the tree of substance. 

Sometimes it is named tree, sometimes sun, 

Sometimes lake, and sometimes cloud. 

'Tis one, though it has thousands of manifestations; 

Its least manifestation is eternal life! 

Though 'tis one, it has a thousand manifestations, 

The names that fit that one are countless. 

That one is to thy personality a father, 



160 

The Masnavi 

In regard to another person He may be a son. 

In relation to another He may be wrath and vengeance, 

In relation to another, mercy and goodness. 

He has thousands of names, yet is One, 

Answering to all of His descriptions, yet indescribable. 

Every one who seeks names, if he is a man of credulity, 

Like thee, remains hopeless and frustrated of his aim. 

Why cleavest thou to this mere name of tree, 

So that thou art utterly balked and disappointed? 

Pass over names and look to qualities, 

So that qualities may lead thee to essence! 

The differences of sects arise from His names; 

When they pierce to His essence they find His peace!" 

This story is followed by another anecdote illustrative of 
the same thesis that attending merely to names and outward 
forms, rather than to the spirit and essence of religion, leads 
men into error and delusion. Four persons, a Persian, an 
Arab, a Turk, and a Greek, were traveling together, and 
received a present of a dirhem. The Persian said he would 
buy "angur" with it, the Arab said he would buy "inab," 
while the Turk and the Greek were for buying "uzum" and 
"astaphil" (staphyle), respectively. Now all these words 
mean one and the same thing, viz. "grapes;" but, owing to 
their ignorance of each other's languages, they fancied they 
each wanted to buy something different, and accordingly a 



161 
Book Two 

violent quarrel arose between them. At last a wise man who 
knew all their languages came up and explained to them 
that they were all wishing for one and the same thing. 

Notes: 

1. Luke i. 41. 



STORY XVIII. The Young Ducks who were brought up 
under a Hen. 

Although a domestic fowl may have taken thee, 

Who art a duckling, under her wing and nurtured thee, 

Thy mother was a duck of that ocean. 

Thy nurse was earthy, and her wing dry land. 

The longing for the ocean which fills thy heart, 

That natural longing of thy soul comes from thy mother. 

Thy longing for dry land comes to thee from thy nurse; 

Quit thy nurse, for she will lead thee astray. 

Leave thy nurse on the dry land and push on, 

Enter the ocean of real Being, like the ducks! 

Though thy nurse may frighten thee away from water, 

Do thou fear not, but haste on into the ocean! 

Thou art a duck, and flourishest on land and water, 

And dost not, like a domestic fowl, dig up the house. 



162 
The Masnavi 



Thou art a king of "the sons of Adam honored by God," 

And settest foot alike on sea and land; 

For impress on thy mind, "We have carried them by sea," 

Before the words, "We have carried them by land." 

The angels go not on dry land, 

And the animals know nothing of the sea; 

Thou in body art an animal, in thy soul an angel; 

Hence thou goest both upon earth and on heaven." 

Hence to outward view "He is a man like you," 

While to his sharp-seeing heart "it hath been revealed." 

His earthy form has fallen on earth, 

His spirit revolving above highest heaven. 

O boy, we are all of us waterfowl, 

The sea knows full well our language. 

Solomon is, as it were, that sea, and we as the birds; 

In Solomon we hold our course to eternity. 

Along with Solomon plunge into the ocean, 

Then, like David, the water will make us coats-of-mail. 

That Solomon is present to every one, 

But negligence closes their eyes and bewitches them. 

Hence, through ignorance, sloth, and folly, 

Though he stands hard by us, we are shut off from him. 

The noise of thunder makes the head of the thirsty ache; 

When he knows not that it unlocks the blessed showers, 

His eyes are fixed on the running stream, 



163 
Book Two 

Unwitting of the sweetness of the rain from heaven. 
He urges the steed of his desire towards the caused, 
And perforce remains shut off from the Causer. 
Whoso beholds the Causer face to face, 
How can he set his heart on things caused on earth? 

Notes: 

1. Koran xvi. 72: "And now have we honored the sons of 
Adam, by sea and by land have we carried them." 

2. Koran xviii. 110: "Say, in sooth I am only a man like you. It 
hath been revealed unto me that your God is one only 
God." 

3. Koran xxvii. 16: "Solomon said, O men, we have been 
taught the speech of birds." 

4. Koran xxvii. 44 and xxi. 80. 



THE SPIRITUAL COUPLETS 

OF 

MAULANA JALALU-'D-DIN MUHAMMAD RUMI 



Book III. 

STORY I. The Travelers who ate the Young Elephant. 

A PARTY of travelers lost their way in a wilderness, and 
were well nigh famished with hunger. While they were con- 
sidering what to do, a sage came up and condoled with 
them on their unfortunate plight. He told them that there 
were many young elephants in the adjacent woods, one of 
which would furnish them an ample meal, but at the same 
time he warned them that if they killed one, its parents 
would in all probability track them out and be revenged on 
them for killing their offspring. 

Shortly after the travelers saw a plump young elephant, 
and could not resist killing and eating it. One alone 
refrained. Then they lay down to rest; but no sooner were 
they fast asleep than a huge elephant made his appearance 
and proceeded to smell the breath of each one of the sleep- 
ers in turn. 

Those whom he perceived to have eaten of the young ele- 
phant's flesh he slew without mercy, sparing only the one 
who had been prudent enough to abstain. 



166 

The Masnavi 

God's care for His children. 

O son, the pious are God's children, 

Absent or present He is informed of their state. 

Deem Him not absent when they are endangered, 

For He is jealous for their lives. 

He saith, "These saints are my children, 

Though remote and alone and away from their Lord. 

For their trial they are orphans and wretched, 

Yet in love I am ever holding communion with them. 

Thou art backed by all my protection; 

My children are, as it were, parts of me. 

Verily these Darveshes of mine 

Are thousands on thousands, and yet no more than One; 

For if not, how did Moses with one magic staff 

Turn the realm of Pharaoh upside down? 

And if it were not so, how did Noah with one curse 

Make East and West alike drowned in his flood? 

Nor could one prayer of eloquent Lot 

Have razed their strong city against their will, 

Their mighty city, like to Paradise, 

Became as a Tigris of black water; go, see its vestige! 

Towards Syria is this vestige and memorial, 

Thou seest it in passing on the way to Jerusalem. 

Thousands of God-fearing prophets 

In every age hold divine chastisements in hand. 



167 
Book Three 

Should I tell of them my limits would be exceeded, 
And not hearts only but very hills would bleed." 

Evil deeds give men's prayers an ill savour in Gods nostrils. 

Thou art asleep, and the smell of that forbidden fruit 

Ascends to the azure skies, 

Ascends along with thy foul breath, 

Till it overpowers heaven with stench; 

Stench of pride, stench of lust, stench of greed. 

All these stink like onions when a man speaks. 

Though thou swearest, saying, "When have I eaten? 

Have I not abstained from onions and garlic?" 

The very breath of that oath tells tales, 

As it strikes the nostrils of them that sit with thee. 

So too prayers are made invalid by such stenches, 

That crooked heart is betrayed by its speech. 

The answer to that prayer is, "Be ye driven into hell," 

The staff of repulsion is the reward of all deceit. 

But, if thy speech be crooked and thy meaning straight, 

Thy crookedness of words will be accepted of God. 

That faithful Bilal, when he called to prayer, 
Would devoutly cry, "Come hither, come hither!" 
At last men said, "O Prophet, this call is not right, 
This is wrong; now, what is thy intention? 



168 
The Masnavi 

O Prophet, and O ambassador of the Almighty, 

Provide another Mu'azzin of better talent. 

'Tis an error at the beginning of our divine worship 

To utter the words, 'Come to the asylum!'" 

The wrath of the Prophet boiled up, and he said 

(Uttering one or two secrets from the fount of grace), 

"O base ones, in God's sight the 'Ho!' of Bilal 

Is better than a hundred 'Come hithers' and ejaculations. 

Ah! excite not a tumult, lest I tell forth openly 

Your secret thoughts from first to last. 

If ye keep not your breath sweet in prayer, 

Go, desire a prayer from the Brethren of Purity!" 

For this cause spake God to Moses, 

At the time he was asking aid in prayer, 

"O Moses! desire protection of me 

With a mouth that thou hast not sinned withal." 

Moses answered, "I possess not such a mouth." 

God said, "Call upon me with another mouth! 

Act so that all thy mouths 

By night and by day may be raising prayers. 

When thou hast sinned with one mouth, 

With thy other mouth cry, 'O Allah!' 

Or else cleanse thy own mouth, 

And make thy spirit alert and quick. 

Calling on God is pure, and when purity approaches, 

Impurity arises and takes its departure. 



169 
Book Three 

Contraries flee away from contraries; 

When day dawns night takes flight. 

When the pure name (of God) enters the mouth, 

Neither does impurity nor that impure mouth remain!" 

The man whose calling "O Allah" was equivalent to God's 
answering him, "Here am I. ' 

That person one night was crying, "O Allah!" 
That his mouth might be sweetened thereby, 
And Satan said to him, "Be quiet, O austere one! 
How long wilt thou babble, O man of many words? 
No answer comes to thee from nigh the throne, 
How long wilt thou cry Allah with harsh face?" 
That person was sad at heart and hung his head, 
And then beheld Khizr present before him in a vision, 
Who said to him, 'Ah! thou hast ceased to call on God, 
Wherefore repentest thou of calling upon Him?" 
The man said, "The answer 'Here am I' came not, 
Wherefore I fear that I am repulsed from the door." 
Khizr replied to him, "God has given me this command; 
Go to him and say, 'O much-tried one, 
Did not I engage thee to do my service? 
Did not I engage thee to call upon me? 
That calling Allah of thine was my 'Here am I,' 
And that pain and longing and ardour of thine my mes- 
senger; 



170 
The Masnavi 

Thy struggles and strivings for assistance 
Were my attractions, and originated thy prayer. 
Thy fear and thy love are the cove,rt of my mercy, 
Each 'O Lord!' of thine contains many 'Here am Fs." 

The soul of fools is alien from this calling on God, 

Because it is not their wont to cry, 'O Lord!' 

On their mouths and hearts are locks and bonds, 

That they may not cry to God in time of distress. 

God gave Pharaoh abundance of riches and wealth, 

So that he boasted that he was 'Lord Supreme.' 

In the whole of his life he suffered no headache, 

So that he never cried to God, wretch that he was. 

God granted him the absolute dominion of the world, 

But withheld from him pain and sorrow and cares; 

Because pain and sorrow and loads of cares 

Are the lot of God's friends in the world. 

Pain is better than the dominion of the world, 

So that thou mayest call on God in secret. 

The cries of those free from pain are dull and cold, 

The cries of the sorrowful come from the burning hearts." 

Notes: 

1. "Whoever eats garlic or onions must keep away from me or 
from the Masjid." (Mishkat ut Masabih, ii. 321). 



171 
Book Three 

2. Koran xxiii. 110: "He will say 'Be ye driven down into it, 
and address me not.'" 

3. Rules for the call to prayer are given in Mishkat ul Masabih 
i. 141. 

4. Or, "What dost thou require of me?" 

5. Koran ii. 6. 



STORY II. The Villager who invited the Townsman 
to visit him. 

A certain villager paid a visit to the town, and there 
received hospitality from one of the townsmen. At his depar- 
ture the villager was profuse of thanks, and pressed the 
townsman to come and see him in his village, and bring his 
family with him. The townsman hesitated long before 
accepting his invitation, having doubts as to his sincerity, 
and remembering the Hadis, "Caution consists in suspecting 
others." But after ten years' solicitation he at length yield- 
ed, and set off with his family to the village. On his arrival 
the villager shut the door in his face, saying that he did not 
know him, and the townsman had to pass five nights in the 
cold and rain. At last, exhausted with suffering, he implored 
the villager to give him shelter, promising to render service 
in return. The villager granted it on condition that he would 
protect his garden from the wolves. The townsman accepted 



172 
The Masnavi 

this condition, and taking bow and arrows, proceeded to 
patrol the garden, but, owing to the rain and the darkness, 
and his own fears, ended by shooting the villager's pet ass in 
mistake for a wolf. The villager abused him roundly, saying 
that he himself would not have taken an ass for a wolf, even 
on the darkest night. The townsman replied, "If that be so, 
you are self-convicted of inhumanity, for you must have rec- 
ognized me, your friend of ten years' standing, the moment 
I knocked at your door. As for me, I am ignorant of all but 
Allah, and, moreover, was unable to see in the darkness; and 
God has said, 'No criminality is imputed to the blind.' But 
your blindness in refusing to recognize me was willful, and 
your claims to humanity are thus proved to be false by the 
test to which you have been submitted." 

Jesus healing the sick. 

The house of 'Isa was the banquet of men of heart, 

Ho! afflicted one, quit not this door! 

From all sides the people ever thronged, 

Many blind and lame, and halt and afflicted, 

To the door of the house of 'Isa at dawn, 

That with his breath he might heal their ailments. 

As soon as he had finished his orisons, 

That holy one would come forth at the third hour; 

He viewed those impotent folk, troop by troop, 



173 
Book Three 

Sitting at his door in hope and expectation; 

He spoke to them, saying, "O stricken ones! 

The desires of all of you have been granted by God; 

Arise, walk without pain or affliction, 

Acknowledge the mercy and beneficence of God!" 

Then all, as camels whose feet are shackled, 

When you loose their feet in the road, 

Straightway rush in joy and delight to the halting-place, 

So did they run upon their feet at his command. 

How many afflictions caused by thyself to thyself 

Hast thou escaped through these princes of the faith? 

How long that lameness of thine was thy steed! 

How seldom was thy soul void of sorrow and grief! 

O careless straggler, bind a rope upon thy feet, 

Lest thou lose even thine own self! 

But thy ingratitude and unthankfulness 

Forget the honey draught thou hast sipped. 

That road was perforce closed to thee 

When thou didst wound the hearts of the men of heart. 

Quick! clasp them and ask pardon of them; 

Like the clouds, shed tears of lamentation, 

So that their rose-garden may bloom for thee, 

And their ripe fruits burst open of themselves. 

Press around that door, be not viler than a dog, 

If thou wouldest rival the Seven Sleepers' dog. 



174 
The Masnavi 

God's claims to our gratitude. 

Whereas want of fidelity is shameful even in dogs, 

How can it be right in men? 

God Almighty Himself makes boast of fidelity, 

Saying, "Who more faithful to his promise than We?" 

Know, infidelity is fidelity to God's adversary, 

No one has pre-eminence over the rights of God. 

The claims of a mother are less than God's, for He, 

That bounteous One, made her debtor for thy embryo. 

He gave thee a form whilst thou wast in her womb, 

In her womb He gave thee needful rest and nurture. 

He viewed her as a part united to thee, 

Then His wisdom separated that united part. 

God devised a thousand plans and arts, 

To make thy mother lavish affection upon thee. 

Wherefore the claims of God predominate over the mothers, 

Whoso acknowledges not God's claims is a fool. 

He who made mother and breast and milk 

United mother to father also, despise Him not! 

Lord, O Ancient of days, Thy mercies, 
Whether known to us or unknown, are all from Thee! 
Thou hast commanded, saying, "Remember thy God," 
Because God's claims are never exhausted! 

Since thou hast been led astray by faithless men, 
Turn now from thy evil doubts to the opposite mind. 

1 am free from error and all faithlessness; 



175 
Book Three 

Thou must come to me and rescind evil doubts. 

Cut off these evil doubts and cast them away, 

For in the presence of such thou becomest double. 

Therefore thou hast chosen harsh friends and companions; 

If I ask where they are thou sayest they are gone. 

The good friend goes up to highest heaven, 

Evil friends sink beneath the bottom of the earth, 

Whilst thou art left alone in the midst, forlorn, 

Even as the fires left by the departed caravan." 

O brave friend, grasp His skirt, 

Who is removed alike from the world above and below; 

Who neither, like. Jesus, ascends to heaven, 

Nor, like Korah, sinks into the earth; 

Who will abide with thee in the house and abroad 

When thou lackest house and home. 

He will bring forth peace out of perturbations, 

And when thou art afllicted will keep His promise. 

How false pretensions to sanctity are 
distinguished from true sanctity. 

O son, a hundred thousand tests await thee, 

Whoever thou art who sayest "I am a prince of the gate," 

If the vulgar detect not such a one by tests, 

Yet the skilled wayfarers seek of him a sign. 

When a man makes pretension to be a tailor, 



176 
The Masnavi 

The master places before him a piece of silk, 

Saying, "Cut out a large head-dress," 

And failure in the test leads him to the pillory. 

If all the evil men were not tested, 

Every catamite would through fraud pass for a Rustam. 

Suppose he wears the semblance of one clad in mail, 

Yet when wounded he is at once taken captive. 

The God-intoxicated are not sobered by old age, 

They remain beside themselves till the last trump. 

The wine of God is true, and not false, 

But thou hast drunk only sour whey. 

Thou makest thyself out to be a Junaid or a Bayazid; 

Go! for do I not know a hatchet from a ploughshare? 

plotter, how canst thou conceal by fraud 
Baseness, sloth, covetousness, and lust? 

Thou holdest thyself out as a lover of God, 
But thou hast coquetted with the evil demon. 
The lover and the beloved on the last day 
Will be joined together and raised in sight of all. 
How foolish and silly thou hast made thyself! 
Thou hast drunk blood of grapes, nay, my blood! 
Go! for I know thee not. Get away! 

1 am a lover beside himself, whose words are wild. 
Thou fanciest thyself near to God, 

Saying, "The maker of the dish is not far from the dish. 
Knowest thou not that the nearness of saints to God 



177 
Book Three 

Involves the power to do mighty works and signs? 

Iron was as wax in the hands of David, 

Wax in thy hands is as iron. 

God's nearness and His beneficence are common to all, 

But only eminent saints enjoy inspired love. 

Nearness is of various kinds, O son, 

The sun shines alike on rocks and on gold. 

Yet the sun possesses a nearness to gold, 

Whereof the common willow has no cognizance. 

The dry branch and the green are alike near the sun, 

Does the sun veil himself from either? 

Yet what is the nearness of that green branch, 

Wherefrom thou eatest ripe fruits? 

But as for the dry branch) from its nearness to the sun, 

What does it but more quickly grow dry and sapless? 

Be not intoxicated after the manner of this branch, 

Which, when it becomes sober, has cause for repentance, 

But, like those drunkards who, when they drink wine, 

Bear ripe fruits of wisdom of penitence. 

Notes: 

1. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, i. p. 370, ascribes this saying to 
the poet, Aqzam bin zaid. 

2. Koran xxiv. 60. 

3. Koran, ix. 112. 



178 
The Masnavi 

STORY III. The Jackal who pretended to be a Peacock. 

A jackal fell into a dye-pit, and his skin was dyed of vari- 
ous colors. Proud of his splendid appearance, he returned to 
his companions, and desired them to address him as a pea- 
cock. But they proceeded to test his pretensions, saying, 
"Dost thou scream like a peacock, or strut about gardens as 
peacocks are wont to do?" And he was forced to admit that 
he did not, whereupon they rejected his pretensions. 
Another story, also on the subject of false pretenders, fol- 
lows. A proud man who lacked food procured a skin full of 
fat, greased his beard and lips with it, and called on his 
friends to observe how luxuriously he had dined. But his 
belly was vexed at this, because it was hungry, and he was 
destroying his chance of being invited to dinner by his 
friends. So the belly cried to God, and a cat came and car- 
ried off the skin of fat, and so the man's false pretences were 
exposed. The poet takes occasion to point out that Pharaoh's 
pretensions to divinity exactly resembled the pretensions of 
this jackal, and adds that all such false pretenders may be 
detected by the mark noted in the Koran, "Ye shall know 
them by the strangeness of their speech." This recalls the 
story of Harut and Marut, two angels who were very severe 
on the frailties of mankind, and whom God sent down upon 
the earth to be tempted, with the result that they both suc- 
cumbed to the charms of the daughters of men. 



179 
Book Three 



Notes: 

1 . Koran xlvii. 32. 

2. Koran ii. 96. 



STORY IV. Moses and Pharaoh. 

Then follows a long account of the birth of Moses, of 
Pharaoh's devices to kill him in his infancy, of his education 
in Pharaoh's house, of his desiring Pharaoh to let the chil- 
dren of Israel go, and of his contest with the magicians of 
Egypt, and his victory over them. In the course of the story 
the following anecdote is narrated: 

A snake-catcher, who was following his occupation in the 
mountains, discovered a large snake frozen by the cold, and, 
imagining it to be dead, he tied it up and took it to Baghdad. 
There all the idlers of the city flocked together to see it, and 
the snake, thawed by the warmth of the sun, recovered life, 
and immediately destroyed the spectators. 

Comparison of fleshly lust to the snake. 

Lust is that snake; How say you it is dead? 
It is only frozen by the pangs of hunger. 



180 
The Masnavi 

If it obtains the state of Pharaoh, 

So as to command the (frozen) rivers to flow, 

Straightway it is led to pride like Pharaohs, 

And it plunders the goods of many a Moses and Aaron. 

Through pressure of want this snake is as a fly, 

It becomes a gnat through wealth and rank and luxury. 

Beware, keep that snake in the frost of humiliation, 

Draw it not forth into the sunshine of 'Iraq! 

So long as that snake is frozen, it is well; 

When it finds release from frost you become its prey. 

Conquer it and save yourself from being conquered, 

Pity it not, it is not one who bears affection. 

For that warmth of the sun kindles its lust, 

And that bat of vileness flaps its wings. 

Slay it in sacred war and combat, 

Like a valiant man will God requite you with union. 

When that man cherished that snake, 

That stubborn brute was happy in the luxury of warmth; 

And of necessity worked destruction, O friend; 

Yea, many more mischiefs than I have told. 

If you wish to keep that snake tied up 

Without trouble, be faithful, be faithful! 

But how can base men attain this wish? 

It requires a Moses to slay serpents; 

And a hundred thousand men were slain by his serpent, 

In dire confusion, according to his purpose. 



181 
Book Three 

STORY V. The Elephant in a Dark Room. 

Some Hindoos were exhibiting an elephant in a dark 
room, and many people collected to see it. But as the place 
was too dark to permit them to see the elephant, they all felt 
it with their hands, to gain an idea of what it was like. One 
felt its trunk, and declared that the beast resembled a water- 
pipe; another felt its ear, and said it must be a large fan; 
another its leg, and thought it must be a pillar; another felt 
its back, and declared the beast must be like a great throne. 
According to the part which each felt, he gave a different 
description of the animal. One, as it were, called it "Dal" 
and another "Alif." 

Comparison of the sensual eye to the hand of one that felt 
the elephant. 

The eye of outward sense is as the palm of a hand, 
The whole of the object is not grasped in the palm. 
The sea itself is one thing, the foam another; 
Neglect the foam, and regard the sea with your eyes. 
Waves of foam rise from the sea night and day, 
You look at the foam ripples and not the mighty sea. 
We, like boats, are tossed hither and thither, 
We are blind though we are on the bright ocean. 
Ah! you who are asleep in the boat of the body, 



182 
The Masnavi 

You see the water; behold the Water of waters! 

Under the water you see there is another Water moving it, 

Within the spirit is a Spirit that calls it. 

Where were Moses and Jesus when that Sun 

Showered down water on the fields sown with corn? 

Where were Adam and Eve what time 

God Almighty fitted the string to His bow? 

The one form of speech is evil and defective; 

The other form, which is not defective, is perfect. 

If I speak thereof your feet stumble, 

Yet if I speak not of it, woe be to you! 

And if I speak in terms of outward form, 

You stick fast in that same form, O son. 

You are footbound like the grass in the ground, 

And your head is shaken by the wind uncertainly. 

Your foot stands not firmly till you move it, 

Nay) till you pluck it not up from the mire. 

When you pluck up your foot you escape from the mire, 

The way to this salvation is very difficult. 

When you obtain salvation at God's hands, O wanderer, 

You are free from the mire, and go your way. 

When the suckling is weaned from its nurse, 

It eats strong meats and leaves the nurse. 

You are bound to the bosom of earth like seeds, 

Strive to be weaned through nutriment of the heart. 

Eat the words of wisdom, for veiled light 



183 
Book Three 

Is not accepted in preference to unveiled light. 
When you have accepted the light, O beloved, 
When you behold what is veiled without a veil, 
Like a star you will walk upon the heavens; 
Nay, though not in heaven, you will walk on high. 

Keep silence, that you may hear Him speaking 

Words unutterable by tongue in speech. 

Keep silence, that you may hear from that Sun 

Things inexpressible in books and discourses. 

Keep silence, that the Spirit may speak to you; 

Give up swimming and enter the ark of Noah; 

Not like Canaan when he was swimming, 

Who said, "I desire not to enter the ark of Noah passing by." 

Noah and his unbelieving son Canaan. 

Noah cried, "Ho! child, come into the ark and rest, 
That you be not drowned in the flood, O weak one." 
Canaan said, "Nay! I have learned to swim, 
I have lit a torch of my own apart from thy torch." 
Noah replied, "Make not light of it, for 'tis the flood of 

destruction, 
Swimming with hands and feet avails naught today. 
The wind of wrath and the storm blow out torches; 
Except the torch of God, all are extinguished." 
He answered "Nay! I am going to that high mountain, 



184 
The Masnavi 

For that will save me from all harm." 

Noah cried, "Beware, do not so, mountains are now as grass; 

Except the Friend none can save thee." 

He answered, "Why should I listen to thy advice? 

For thou desirest to make me one of thy flock. 

Thy speech is by no means pleasing to me, 

I am free from thee in this world and the next." 

Thus the more good advice Noah gave him, 
The more stubborn refusals he returned. 
Neither was his father tired of advising Canaan, 
Nor did his advice make any impression on Canaan; 
While they were yet talking a violent wave 
Smote Canaan's head, and he was overwhelmed. 

Reconciliatian of the two traditions, "Acquiescence in 

infidelity is infidelity" and "Whoso acquiesces not in 

God's ordinance desires another Lord besides me". 

Yesterday an inquirer questioned me, 

Since he was interested in the foregoing narrative, 

Saying, "The Prophet, whose words are as a seal, 

Said, 'Acquiescence in infidelity is infidelity' 

And again, Acquiescence in God's ordinance 

Is incumbent on all true believers.' 

Infidelity and hypocrisy are not ordained of God; 

If I acquiesce in them I am at variance with God. 



185 
Book Three 

And yet, if I acquiesce not, that again is wrong; 

What way of escape is there from this dilemma? " 

I said to him, "This infidelity is ordained, not ordinance, 

Though this infidelity is the work of the ordinance. 

Therefore distinguish the ordinance from the ordained, 

That thy difficulty may be at once removed. 

I acquiesce in infidelity so far as it is God's ordinance, 

Not so far as it is our evil and foul passions. 

Infidelity qua ordinance is not infidelity, 

Call not God an infidel. Set not foot in this place. 

Infidelity is folly, ordained infidelity wisdom, 

How can mercy and vengeance be the same? 

Ugliness of the picture is not ugliness of the painter, 

Not so, for he erases ugly pictures. 

The ability of the painter is shown in this, 

That he can paint both ugly and beautiful pictures. 

If I should pursue this argument properly, 

So that questions and answers should be prolonged, 

The unction of the mystery of love would escape me, 

The picture of obedience would become another picture." 

Bewilderment from intense love of God puts 
an end to all thinking and argument. 

A certain man whose hair was half gray came in haste 

To a barber who was a friend of his, 

Saying, "Pluck out the white hairs from my beard, 



186 
The Masnavi 

For I have selected a young bride, O my son. 
The barber cut off his beard and laid it before him, 
Saying, "Do you part them, the task is beyond me." 
Questions are white and answers black; do you choose, 
For the man of faith knows not how to choose. 

Thus, one smote Zaid a blow, 

And Zaid attacked him for his treachery. 

The striker said, "Let me first ask you a question, 

Give me an answer to it and then strike me; 

I struck your back and a bruise appeared, 

Now I ask you a question in all kindliness, 

Did this bruise proceed from my hand, 

Or from the smitten part of your back, O complainer?" 

Zaid replied, "Through pain I am not in a condition 

To enter upon thought and consideration of this. 

You, who are free from pain, think this out; 

Such trifling thoughts occur not to a man in pain." 

Men in pain have no time for other thoughts, 
Whether you enter mosque or Christian church. 
Your carelessness and injustice suggest thoughts 
And unprecedented difficulties to your imagination. 
The man in pain cares only for the faith, 
He is aware only of man and his work. 
He set's God's command upon his head and face, 
And for thinking, he puts it aside. 



187 
Book Three 

Notes: 

1 . Koran xi. 44. 

2. Or "decreed, not decree" (maqzi nai qaza). I confess I do not 
understand the distinction. 

3. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 287. 

4. The four last couplets are omitted in the Bulaq edition. 



STORY VI. The Lover who read Sonnets to his Mistress. 

A lover was once admitted to the presence of his mistress, 
but, instead of embracing her, he pulled out a paper of son- 
nets and read them to her, describing her perfections and 
charms and his own love towards her at length. His mistress 
said to him, "You are now in my presence, and these lover's 
sighs and invocations are a waste of time. It is not the part 
of a true lover to waste his time in this way. It shows that I 
am not the real object of your affection, but that what you 
really love is your own effusions and ecstatic raptures. I see, 
as it were, the water which I have longed for before me, and 
yet you withhold it. I am, as it were, in Bulgaria, and the 
object of your love is in Cathay. One who is really loved is 
the single object of her lover, the Alpha and Omega of his 
desires. As for you, you are wrapped up in your own 
amorous raptures, depending on the varying states of your 
own feelings, instead of being wrapped up in me." 



188 
The Masnavi 



The true mystic must not stop at mere subjective religious 
emotions, but seek absolute union with God. 



Whoso is restricted to religious raptures is but a man; 

Sometimes his rapture is excessive, sometimes deficient. 

The Sufi is, as it were, the "son of the season," 

But the pure (Safi) is exalted above season and state. 

Religious raptures depend on feelings and will, 

But the pure one is regenerated by the breath of Jesus. 

You are a lover of your own raptures, not of me; 

You turn to me only in hope of experiencing raptures. 

Whoso is now defective, now perfect, 

Is not adored by Abraham; he is "one that sets." 

Because the stars set, and are now up, now down, 

He loved them not; "I love not them that set." 

Whoso is now pleasing and now unpleasing 

Is at one time water, at another fire. 

He may be the house of the moon, but not the true moon; 

Or as the picture of a mistress, but not the living one. 

The mere Sufi is the " child of the season;" 

He clings to seasons as to a father, 

But the pure one is drowned in overwhelming love. 

A child of any one is never free from season and state. 

The pure one is drowned in the light cc that is not begotten," 

"What begets not and is not begotten" is God. 

Go I seek such love as this, if you are alive; 



189 
Book Three 

If not, you are enslaved by varying seasons. 

Gaze not on your own pictures, fair or ugly, 

Gaze on your love and the object of your desire. 

Gaze not at the sight of your own weakness or vileness, 

Gaze at object of your desire, O exalted one. 

Notes: 

1. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 850. 

2. Koran vi. 77. 

3. Koran cxii. 3. 



STORY VII. The Man who prayed earnestly to be fed 
without work. 

In the time of the prophet David there was a man who 
used to pray day and night, saying, "Thou hast created me 
weak and helpless; give me my daily bread without obliging 
me to work for it." The people derided him for making such 
a foolish petition, but he still persisted, and at last a cow ran 
into his house of its own accord, and he killed and ate it. 
This illustrates the saying of the Prophet that God loves 
earnest petitioners, because He regards the sincerity of the 
prayer more than the nature of the thing prayed for. All 
things praise God, but the praises of inanimate things are 



190 

The Masnavi 

different from the praises of men, and those of a Sunni dif- 
ferent from those of a Compulsionist (Jabri). Each says the 
other is in the way of error, but none but the truly spiritual 
man knows the truth. 

Knowledge or conviction, opposed to opinion. 

Little is known by any one but the spiritual man, 

Who has in his heart a touchstone of vital truth. 

The others, hovering between two opinions, 

Fly towards their nest on a single wing. 

Knowledge has two wings, opinion only one wing; 

Opinion is weak and lopsided in its flight. 

The bird having but one wing quickly drops down, 

And again flies on two steps or more. 

This bird of opinion goes on rising and falling 

On one wing, in hope to reach his nest. 

When he escapes from opinion and knowledge is seen, 

This bird gains two wings and spreads both of them. 

Afterwards he "goes upright on a straight path, 

Not grovelling on his face or creeping." 1 

He flies up on two wings even as the angel Gabriel, 

Free of opinion, of duplicity, and of vain talk. 

Though the whole world say to him, 

"Thou art firm in the road of God's faith," 

He is not made more ardent by their saying this, 

Nor is his lofty soul inclined from its course. 



191 
Book Three 

And though all say to him, "Thou art in the wrong way 

Thou thinkest thyself a rock who art but a blade of grass, 

He relapses not into opinion at their rebukes, 

Nor is he vexed at their malevolence. 

Nay, even if sea and mountains should cry out, 

Saying, "Thou art mated with error," 

He would not relapse one jot into vain imaginations, 

Nor would he be grieved by the reproaches of his foes. 

Notes: 

1. Koran lxvii, 22. 



STORY VIII. The Boys and their Teacher. 

To illustrate the force of imagination or opinion, a story 
is told of a trick played by boys upon their master. The boys 
wished to obtain a holiday, and the sharpest of them sug- 
gested that when the master came into the school each boy 
should condole with him on his alleged sickly appearance. 
Accordingly, when he entered, one said, "O master, how 
pale you are looking!" and another said, "You are looking 
very ill today," and so on. The master at first answered that 
there was nothing the matter with him, but as one boy after 
another continued assuring him that he looked very ill, he 
was at length deluded into imagining that he must really be 



192 
The Masnavi 

ill. So he returned to his house, making the boys follow him 
there, and told his wife that he was not well, bidding her 
mark how pale he was. His wife assured him he was not 
looking pale, and offered to convince him by bringing a 
mirror; but he refused to look at it, and took to his bed. He 
then ordered the boys to begin their lessons; but they 
assured him that the noise made his head ache, and he 
believed them, and dismissed them to their homes, to the 
annoyance of their mothers. Apropos of the sharpness of the 
boy who devised this trick, the poet takes occasion to con- 
trovert the opinion of the Mu'tazalites, that all men are born 
with equal ability, and to express his agreement with the 
doctrine of the Sunnis, that the innate capacities of men 
vary very greatly. 



STORY IX. The Darvesh who Broke his Vow. 

There was once a Darvesh who took up his abode in the 
mountains, in order to enjoy perfect solitude. In that place 
were many fruit-trees, and the Darvesh made a vow that he 
would never pluck any of the fruit, but eat only what was 
shaken down by the wind. For a long time he kept his vow; 
but a time came when there was no wind, and consequent- 
ly no fruit was shaken down. The Darvesh was true to his 
vow for five days, but ho could then endure the pangs of 
hunger no longer, and he stretched out his hand and 



193 
Book Three 

plucked some of the fruit from the branches. The reason of 
this lapse on his part was that he had omitted to say "If God 
will" when making his vow; and as nothing can be accom- 
plished without God's aid, ho could not possibly keep his 
vow. Shortly afterwards the chief of the police visited the 
mountains in pursuit of a band of robbers, and arrested the 
Darvesh along with them, and cut off his hand. When he 
discovered his mistake he apologized very earnestly; but the 
Darvesh reassured him, saying that men were not to blame, 
as God had evidently designed to punish him for breaking 
his vow 'by depriving him of the hand which had sinned in 
plucking the fruit. 

All things dependent upon the will of God. 

Therefore hath God commanded, "Make an exception, 

Couple the words 'If God will' with your vows. 

Because the governance of actions is in my hands, 

The wills of all are subject to my will. 

Every moment I impart a fresh bias to the heart, 

Every instant I set a fresh mark on the heart; 

Each day I am engaged in a fresh work, 

There is naught that swerves from my purpose." 

There is a tradition, "The heart is like a feather 
In the desert, which is borne captive by the winds; 
The wind drives it everywhere at random, 



194 
The Masnavi 

Now to right and now to left in opposite directions." 

According to another tradition, know the heart is like 

To water in a kettle boiling on the fire. 

So every moment a fresh purpose occurs to the heart, 

Not proceeding from itself, but from its situation. 

Why, then, are you confident about the heart's purposes? 

Why make you vows only to be covered with shame? 

All these changes proceed from the effect of God's will; 

Although you see the pit, you cannot avoid it. 

The strange thing is, not that winged fowl 

Fall into the deadly snare without seeing it, 

But that they see the snare and the limed twig, 

And yet fall into it, whether they will or no; 

Their eyes and ears are open and the snare is in front, 

Yet they fly into the snare with their own wings! 

Comparison of the divine decrees to something that is hidden, 
yet whose effects are seen. 

Behold that king's son clad in rags, 
With bare head and fallen into distress; 
Consumed by lusts and riotous living, 
Having sold all his clothes and substance; 
Having lost house and home, utterly disgraced, 
Fulfilling the desire of his enemies by his disgrace. 
If he sees a pious man he cries, "O sir, 
Aid me, for the love of God; 



195 
Book Three 

For I have fallen into this dire disgrace; 

I have squandered goods and gold and wealth. 

Aid me so that perchance I may escape hence, 

And extricate myself from this deep slough." 

He repeats this prayer to high and low, 

" Release me, release me, release me!" 

His eyes and ears are open, and he is free from bonds, 

No jailer watches him, no chain binds him; 

What, then, is the bond from which he asks release? 

What is the prison from which ho seeks an exit? 

'Tis the bond of God's purpose and hidden decrees; 

Ah! none but the pure in sight can see that bond; 

Though not visible, that bond exists in concealment; 

'Tis more stringent than prison or chains of iron, 

For the mason can pull down prison walls, 

And blacksmiths can break asunder iron chains; 

But, strange to say, this ponderous hidden bond, 

Blacksmiths are impotent to break this asunder! 



Ahmad alone could see that bond on Omm Jahil's back, 
And the rope of palm fiber bound upon her neck; 
Yea, he saw wood on the back of the wife of Bu Lahab, 
And she, the bearer of the firewood, said it was heavy. 
No eye but his saw that rope and that firewood, 
For to him things unseen were visible. 
The others explained it, saying 
That Ahmad was beside himself, and they in their senses. 



196 

The Masnavi 

Nevertheless from the weight of the load her back bent, 

And she complained of its weight before him, 

Saying, "Aid me to escape from this load, 

And to shake off this grievous burden." 

He who sees clearly these indications, 

Does he not know also the doomed from the elect? 

Yea, he knows them, yet conceals it by command of God, 

Since God permits him not to reveal it. 

Notes: 

1. cp. Cranmer. 

2. Koran xviii. 23. 

3. Koran lv. 29; cp. John v. 17. 

4. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, vol. iii. p. 490. 

5. See Koran cxi.: Abu Labab, at the instigation of his wife, 
Omm Jahil, rejected Muhammad's claim to the prophetic 
office and Muhammad declared that they should be burned 
in the fiery flame," and the wife "laden with firewood, and 
on her neck a rope of palm fiber." 



STORY X. The Old Man who made no Lamentation at the 
Death of his Sons. 

After short anecdotes of Pharaoh's magicians, of the mule 
who complained to the camel that he was always stumbling, 



197 
Book Three 

and of the prophet Ezra, comes the story of the old man 
who wept not for the death of his sons. 

An old man who was noted for sanctity, and who realized 
the saying of the Prophet, "The 'ulama of the faith are as the 
prophets of Israel," lost all his sons, but showed no grief or 
regret. His wife therefore rebuked him for his want of feel- 
ing, whereupon he replied to her as follows: 

He turned to his wife and said, "O dame, 

The harvest of December is not as that of July; 

Though they be dead or though they be living, 

Are they not equally visible to the eyes of the heart? 

I behold them clearly before me, 

Wherefore should I disfigure my countenance like you? 

Though they have gone forth by revolution of fortune, 

They are with me still, playing round me. 

The cause of lamentation is separation or parting, 

But I am still with my dear ones, and embrace them. 

Ordinary people may see them in dreams, 

But I see them clearly, though wide awake. 

I conceal myself a while from this world, 

I shake down the leaves of outward sense from the tree. 

Know, O wife, outward sense is captive to reason, 

And reason, again, is captive to spirit. 

Spirit unlooses the chained hands of reason; 

Yea, it opens all things that are closed. 



198 
The Masnavi 

Sensations and thoughts resemble weeds 

Which occupy the surface of pure water. 

The hand of reason puts these weeds aside, 

And the pure water is then visible to the wise. 

Weeds in plenty cover the stream like bubbles; 

When they are swept aside, the water is seen; 

But when God unlooses not the hands of reason, 

The weeds on our water grow thick through carnal lust; 

Yea, they cover up your water more and more, 

While your lust is smiling and your reason weeping. 

When fear of God binds the hands of lust, 

Then God unlooses the two hands of reason. 

Then the powerful senses are subdued by you, 

When you submit to reason as your commander 

Then your sleepless sense is lulled into sleep, 

That mysteries may appear to the soul. 

You behold visions when broad awake, 

And the gates of heaven are open before you." 



STORY XL Bahlol and the Darvesh. 

The foregoing story is followed by anecdotes of a blind 
saint who was miraculously enabled to read the Koran, of 
Luqman and David, and a description of the saints who, 
mindful of the saying, "Patience is the key of happiness, 



199 
Book Three 

resign themselves to the dispensations of Providence, and 
never pray to have them altered. The story of Bahlol and the 
Darvesh is then given as an example of this resignation to 
the will of God. Bahlol once paid a visit to a saintly 
Darvesh, and asked him how he fared. The Darvesh replied, 
"I fare like a man who directs the course of the world as he 
wills, to whom death and life are subservient, and whom 
tho stars themselves obey." Bahlol then pressed him to 
explain his meaning more clearly, and the Darvesh replied 
as follows: 

He said, "This at least is notorious to all men, 

That the world obeys the command of God. 

Not a leaf falls from a tree 

Without the decree and command of that Lord of lords; 

Not a morsel goes from the mouth down the throat 

Till God says to it, 'Go down.' 

Desire and appetite, which are the reins of mankind, 

Are themselves subservient to the rule of God. 

Hear this much, that, whereas the totality of actions 
Is not effected without God's direction, 
When the decree of God becomes the pleasure of man, 
Then man desires the fulfillment of God's decrees; 
And this too spontaneously, not in hope of reward, 
But because his very nature is congruous therewith. 



200 
The Masnavi 

He desires not even his own life for himself, 

Nor is he relying on the hope of sweets of life to come. 

Whatever path is taken by the eternal decree, 

Whether it be life or death, 'tis all one to him. 

He lives for the sake of God, not for wealth; 

He dies for the sake of God, not in fear and grief. 

His faith is based on his desire to do God's will, 

Not on hope to gain paradise with its groves and founts. 

His avoidance of infidelity is also for God's sake, 

It proceeds not from fear of falling into the fire. 

Thus this temper of his arises from his very nature, 

Not from any discipline and endeavor of his own. 

At times he laughs when he contemplates God's pleasure, 

God's decrees are to him as sweetmeats of sugar. 

I ask, does not the world march agreeably to the will 

And commands of a man rejoicing in this disposition? 

Why, then, should such a one make prayers and petitions, 

Saying, 'O God, change such and such a decree?' 

His own death and his children's deaths 

For God's sake seem to him as sweets in the mouth. 

In the view of that faithful one his children's deaths 

Are as sweetmeats to a starving beggar. 

Why, therefore, should he make prayers 

Unless he pray for what is pleasing to God? 

These prayers and petitions, not those of self-pity 

Make that man to be endued with salvation. 



201 
Book Three 

He utterly burned up all his self-pity, 
At the time when he lit the lamp of love to God. 
His love was the hell that burned up his inclinations; 
Yea, ho burned up his own inclinations one by one." 



STORY XII. The Visions seen by the Saint Daquqi. 

To illustrate the exalted state of identification of the will 
with the Divine will just described, the poet tells the story 
of the visions and mighty works of the holy Daquqi. 
Daquqi was journeying in pious fervor, and in hope to see 
the splendour of "The Friend" in human shape, the Ocean 
in a drop of water, and the Sun in an atom, when late one 
evening he arrived at the seashore. Turning his eyes to heav- 
en, he saw seven great lights never before seen of men, for 
"God directs whom He will." Overwhelmed with awe, he 
watched these lights, and while he still watched them they 
united into one light. Still more amazed, he watched on, 
and the single light shortly assumed the likeness of seven 
men. Afterwards these seven men changed into seven trees; 
but, strange to say, although crowds of people were passing 
by, none of them could see these trees, so that Daquqi 
shared the feelings of the apostles "who lost all hope" (of 
convincing the world), "and deemed that, they were reck- 
oned as liars." Possessing his soul in patience, Daquqi still 



202 
The Masnavi 

watched on, and saw the seven trees bowing down in prayer, 
and was reminded of the text, "Plants and trees bend in 
adoration." Presently the seven trees again changed into 
seven men, and Daquqi was appointed to conduct their 
devotions. While he was yet acting as Imam in front of 
them, and they were following the prayers he recited, a ship 
was seen in great distress and all but lost. At Daquqi's 
earnest prayer the crew were saved, but straightway van- 
ished from sight; and this led his followers to doubt the real- 
ity of the miracle which had just been performed before 
their eyes. 

Description of a saint whose will 
was identified with God's will. 

That Daquqi possessed a sweet aspect, 

As a lover of God and a worker of miracles. 

He resembled the moon of heaven come down on earth, 

He was as a light to them that walked in darkness. 

He rarely tarried in one place, 

And seldom stayed two days in one village. 

He said, "If I tarry in one house two days, 

Attachment to that house becomes a passion with me. 

I guard myself from being deceived into loving a home; 

Up! Soul, and travel in search of eternal wealth. 

My heart's inclination is not satisfied by houses, 

So that they should be places of temptation for me." 



203 
Book Three 

Thus by day he traveled, and by night prayed, 
His eyes were always gazing on the King as a falcon's; 
Cut off from mankind, though not for any fault, 
Severed from men and women, though not for baseness; 
Having compassion on mankind, and wholesome as water, 
A kind intercessor, and one whose prayers were heard. 
Benevolent to the good and the bad, and a firm ally, 
Better than a mother, and kinder than a father. 
The Prophet said, "To you, O blessed ones, 
I am as a father, affectionate and indulgent; 
For this cause, that you are all portions of me." 
Wherefore should you tear away the parts from the whole? 
If the part be severed from its whole it is useless; 
If a limb be rent from the body it dies. 
Till it is again joined to its whole, 
'Tis a dead thing, and a stranger to life. 

Thus Daquqi, in devotions and praises and prayers, 
Was ever seeking the particular favorites of God. 
Throughout his long journeys his object was this, 
To interchange a word with the favorites of God. 
He cried continually as he went his way, 
"O Lord, let me draw near to Thy chosen ones!" 

So Daquqi (the mercy of God be upon him!) 
Said, "I journeyed long time to East and to West, 
I journeyed years and months for love of that Moon, 



204 
The Masnavi 

Heedless of the way, absorbed in God. 

With bare feet I trod upon thorns and flints, 

Seeing I was bewildered, and beside myself, and senseless. 

Think not my feet touched the earth, 

For the lover verily travels with the heart. 

What knows the heart of road and stages? 

What of distant and near, while it is drunk with love? 

Distance and nearness are attributes of bodies, 

The journeys of spirits are after another sort. 

You journeyed from the embryo state to rationality 

Without footsteps or stages or change of place, 

The journey of the soul involves not time and place. 

And my body learnt from the soul its mode of journeying 

Now my body has renounced the bodily mode of journeying 

It journeys secretly and without form, though under a form.' 

He added, "One day I was thus filled with longing 

To behold in human form the splendours of 'The Friend,' 

To witness the Ocean gathered up into a drop, 

The Sun compressed into a single atom; 

And when I drew near to the shore of the sea 

The day was drawing to a close." 

All religions are in substance one and the same. 

In the adorations and benedictions of righteous men 
The praises of all the prophets are kneaded together. 
All their praises are mingled into one stream, 



205 
Book Three 

All the vessels are emptied into one ewer. 

Because He that is praised is, in fact, only One, 

In this respect all religions are only one religion. 

Because all praises are directed towards God's light, 

Their various forms and figures are borrowed from it. 

Men never address praises but to One deemed worthy, 

They err only through mistaken opinions of Him. 

So, when a light falls upon a wall, 

That wall is a connecting-link between all its beams; 

Yet when it casts that reflection back to its source, 

It wrongly shows great as small, and halts in its praises. 

Or if the moon be reflected in a well, 

And one looks down the well, and mistakenly praises it, 

In reality he is intending to praise the moon, 

Although, through ignorance, he is looking down the well. 

The object of his praises is the moon, not its reflection; 

His infidelity arises from mistake of the circumstances. 

That well-meaning man goes wrong through his mistake; 

The moon is in heaven, and he fancies it in the well. 

By these false idols mankind are perplexed, 

And driven by vain lusts to their sorrow. 

The Man in the time of the Prophet David who prayed to be 
fed without having to work for his food. 

After the petitioner had slain and eaten the cow, the 
owner of the cow came up and accused him of theft, and 



206 
The Masnavi 

seizing him by the collar, dragged him before the judgment- 
seat of the prophet David. When he had stated his case, 
David ordered the accused to make restitution, telling him 
that he must not break the law. At this order the accused 
redoubled his cries, telling David that he was siding with an 
oppressor. David was staggered at the man's assurance, and 
finally resolved to take further time for consideration before 
deciding the case. After private meditation he reversed his 
former sentence, and directed the plaintiff to relinquish his 
claim. On the plaintiff refusing to do this, and stoutly 
protesting against David's injustice. David further ordered 
that all the plaintiff's goods should be given to the accused. 
The reason for this decision was, that David discovered the 
plaintiff had formerly slain the grandfather of the accused, 
and stolen all his goods. David then led all the Mosalmans 
to a tree in the desert where the murder had been perpe- 
trated, and there put the murderer to death. 

The hands and feet of criminals betray their crimes even in 
this world. 

He of himself lifted the veil that hid his crime; 
Had he not done so, God would have kept it hidden. 
Criminals and sinners, even in the course of sinning, 
Themselves rend the coverings of their crimes. 
Their sins are veiled among the heart's secrets, 



207 
Book Three 

Yet the criminal himself exposes them to view, 

Saying, "Behold me wearing a pair of horns, 

A cow of hell in sight of all men." 

Thus, even here, in the midst of thy sin, thy hand and foot 

Bear witness of the secrets of thy heart. 

Thy secret thought is as a governor who says to thee, 

"Tell forth thy convictions, withhold them not;" 

Especially in seasons of passion and angry talk 

It betrays thy secrets one by one. 

Thy secret sins and crimes govern hand and foot, 

Saying, "Disclose us to men, O hand and foot!" 

And since these witnesses take the bit in their mouths, 

Especially in times of passion and wrath and revenge, 

Therefore the same God who appointed this governor 

To blazen forth thy secret sins to the world 

Is also able to create many more governors 

To divulge thy secret sins on the day of judgment. 

man whose only handiwork is crime and sin; 
Thy secret sins are manifest; no divulging is needed. 
There is no need to proclaim thy sins, 

All men are cognizant of thy sin-burnt heart. 
Thy soul every moment casts up sparks of fire, 
Which say, "See me a man destined to the fire; 

1 am a part of the fire, and go to join my whole; 
Not a light, so that I should join the Source of light." 



208 
The Masnavi 

Comparison of lust to the murderer in the story. 

Kill thine own lust and give life to the world; 

It has killed its lord, reduce it to servitude. 

That claimant of the cow is thy lust; Beware! 

It has made itself lord and master. 

That slayer of the cow is thy reason; Go! 

Be not obdurate to the prayers of him that kills the cow. 

Reason is a poor captive, and ever cries to God 

For meat on its dish without laboring and toiling. 

On what depends its getting meat without toiling? 

On its killing the cow of the body, the source of evil. 

Lust says, "Why hast thou killed my cow?" 

It says, "Because lust's cow is the form of the body." 

Reason, the Lord's child, has become a pauper, 

Lust, the murderer, has become a lord and chief. 

Know'st thou what is meat untoiled for? 

'Tis the food of spirits and the aliment of the Prophet. 

But it is attainable only by slaying the cow; 

Treasure is gained by digging, O digger of treasure! 

Notes: 

1. Koran lv. 5. 

2. Koran xii. 110. 

3. Koran ii. 136. 



209 
Book Three 

"On that day shall their hands speak unto us, and their feet 
shall bear witness of that which they have done" (Koran 
xxxvi. 65). 

Bahau-'d-Din Amili, in his Nan wa Halwa, chap, iv., com- 
pares lust to a cow, referring to Koran ii. 63. 



STORY XIII. The People of Saba. 

After an anecdote of 'Isa being obliged to ascend a moun- 
tain to get away from the fools comes the story of the men 
of Saba. "A sign there was to Saba in their dwelling-places 
two gardens, the one on the right hand and the other on the 
left; 'Eat ye of your Lord's supplies, and give thanks to Him; 
goodly is the country and gracious is the Lord.' But they 
turned aside, so we sent upon them the flood of lram. Such 
was our retribution on them for their ingratitude." The 
men of Saba were all fools, and brought destruction on 
themselves by their ingratitude to God. One was far-sight- 
ed, and yet blind; another sharp of hearing, and yet deaf; 
and a third naked, and yet wearing a long robe. Avarice is 
blind to its own faults, but sees those of others; the sharp- 
eared deaf man hears death approaching others, but not 
himself, and the long-robed naked man is he who fears rob- 
bers, though he has nothing to lose. In fact, all these men of 
Saba were afflicted with follies and self-delusions of this 



210 
The Masnavi 

kind, and gave no thanks to God for the blessings which 
they enjoyed. Accordingly thirteen prophets were sent to 
admonish them, but their admonitions were not listened to, 
the men of Saba questioning their divine mission and 
demanding a miracle as a sign. They also told the prophets 
a parable of a clever hare, who, wishing to frighten an ele- 
phant away from a fountain, went to the elephant, pretend- 
ing to be an ambassador from the moon. The prophets 
were naturally indignant at the effrontery of the men of 
Saba in misapplying parables to discredit their divine mis- 
sion, and reminded them that wicked men had flouted the 
prophet Noah in the same way when he was warning them 
of the flood. And they demonstrated at length how the men 
of Saba had misapplied the parable of the hare and the ele- 
phant, and again adjured them to believe. But the men of 
Saba continued refractory, and would not, accept the 
Prophets' counsels. They plied the prophets with the argu- 
ments of the Compulsionists (Jabriyan), and refused to be 
convinced of the fallacy of their reasoning. So at last the 
prophets despaired of them, and left them to their doom. 

Not every one can properly use similitudes and parables in 
divine matters. 

The faculty of using similitudes is peculiar to a saint 
Who is signally marked by knowledge of hidden mysteries. 
What know you of the mystery hid in aught, that you 



211 
Book Three 

In your folly should use similitudes of curl and cheek? 

Moses took his staff to be a stick, though it was not; 

It was a serpent, and its mystery was revealed. 

If a saint such as he knew not the mystery of a stick, 

What know you of the mystery of the snare and grains? 

When the eye of a Moses erred as to a similitude, 

How can a presumptuous mouse understand one? 

Those similitudes of yours are changed into serpents 

To tear you into pieces with their jaws. 

Such a parable did cursed Iblis use, 

So that he became cursed of God till the day of doom. 

Such a parable did Korah use in his argument, 

So that he was swallowed up in the earth with his wealth. 

Such parables know to be as crows and owls, 

Whereby a hundred households are annihilated. 

When Noah was building the ark in the desert, 

A hundred parable-mongers attacked him with irony, 

Saying, "In the desert, where is no water or well, 

He builds a boat! What ignorant folly is this!" 

The arguments of the Jabriyan, i.e., the Fatalists or 
Compulsionists. 

The men of Saba said, "O preachers, enough! 
What you say is enough, if there are any wise here. 
God has placed a 'lock upon our hearts,' 
And no man can overcome the Creator. 



212 
The Masnavi 

That great Painter has painted us thus; 

His painting cannot be altered by argument. 

Keep telling forever a stone to become a ruby, 

Keep telling forever the old to become young! 

Tell earth to assume the quality of water, 

Bid water to become honey or milk! 

God is the creator of heaven and them that dwell therein; 

Also of water and of earth, and them that dwell therein; 

To heaven He gave its revolutions and its purity, 

To the earth its dark look and appearance. 

Can the heaven will to become as dregs? 

Can earth will to assume the clearness of pure wine? 

That Person has assigned 'to each its lot, 

Can mountain by endeavor become as grass?" 

The prophets answered, "Verily God has created 
Some qualities in you which you cannot alter; 
But He has created other accidental qualities, 
Which, being objectionable, may be made good. 
Bid stone become gold that is impossible; 
Bid copper become gold that is possible. 
Bid sand bloom as a rose it cannot; 
Bid dust turn to mud that is within its capacity. 
God has sent some pains for which there is no cure, 
Such, for instance, as lameness, loss of nose, and blind- 
ness. 
God has sent other pains for which there are cures, 



213 
Book Three 

To wit, crooked mouth and headache. 

God has ordained these remedies of His mercy; 

The use of these in pain and anguish is not in vain. 

Nay, the majority of pains may be cured; 

When you seek those cures earnestly you find them." 

The men of Saba replied, "O men, these pains of ours 

Are not of the sort 'that admit of cure. 

Long time ye utter these presages and warnings, 

But our bonds are made thereby heavier every moment. 

If our sickness admitted of a cure, 

It would certainly have been lessened by your spells. 

When the body is obstructed water reaches not the liver, 

Though one drinks the ocean, it passes elsewhere. 

Then of course the hands and feet become dropsical, 

And. yet that draught does not quench his thirst." 

The prophets replied, "To despair is wrong, 

The mercy and grace of God are boundless. 

One must not despair of the grace of such a Benefactor, 

One must cling to the stirrup-straps of God. 

Ah! many are the conditions which at first are hard, 

But, are afterwards relieved and lose their harshless. 

Oftentimes hope succeeds to hopelessness, 

Many times does sunlight succeed to darkness. 

We admit that ye are weighted as with stones, 

And that ye have locks upon your ears and your hearts. 



214 
The Masnavi 

No condition of ours is altogether as we wish, 
Our business is to be resigned and to obey. 
God has enjoined this servitude upon us; 
We say not this merely on our own authority. 
We enjoy life on condition of doing His will; 
If He bids us, we sow our seed upon the sand. 
The soul of the prophet cares for naught but God, 
It has naught to do with approving or disapproving His 
works." 

The men of Saba replied, "If ye yourselves are happy, 

Ye make us miserable and annoy and disturb us. 

Our souls were void of all anxieties, 

And ye have plunged us into cares and anxieties. 

The comfort and harmony which we enjoyed heretofore 

Have been rent in pieces by your evil presages. 

We used to be as parrots munching sugar, 

Ye have made us as fowls brooding on death. 

On every side stories inspiring anxiety, 

On every side sounds exciting fears: 

On every side in the world an evil presage, 

On every side evil portents threatening punishment: 

This is the burden of your parables and presages, 

This the purport of your awe-inspiring stories." 

The prophets replied, "Our evil presages 
Are corroborated by the state of your souls. 



215 
Book Three 

Suppose you are sleeping in a place of danger, 

And serpents are drawing near to bite your heads, 

A kind friend will inform you of your danger, 

Saying, 'Jump up, lest the serpent devour you.' 

You reply, 'Why do you utter evil presages?' 

He answers, 'What presage? Up, and see for yourself! 

By means of this evil presage I rouse you, 

And release you from danger and lead you to your home.' 

Like a prophet he warns you of hidden danger, 

For a prophet sees what worldlings cannot see." 

Mercy inclines the good to devotion, but vengeance the bad. 

If you do a kindness to a generous man, 'tis fitting, 
For each kindness he will return seven hundredfold. 
When you treat a base man with scorn and contumely, 
He will become your slave in all sincerity. 
Infidels when enjoying prosperity do wrong, 
When they are in hell they cry, "O our Lord!" 
For base men are purified when they suffer evil, 
And when they enjoy prosperity they do evil. 
Wherefore the mosque of their devotion is hell, 
As the snare is the fetter of wild fowl. 
The prison is the hermitage of the wicked thief, 
For when he is there he is ever crying to God. 
Whereas the object of man's being is to worship God, 
Hell is ordained as a place of worship for the proud; 



216 
The Masnavi 

Man has the power to engage in any actions soever, 
But worship of God is the main object of his existence. 
Read the text, "I have not created Jinns and men but to 

worship me." 
The only object of the world is to worship God. 
Though the object of a book is to teach an art, 
If you make a pillow of it, it serves that purpose too. 
Yet its main object is not to serve as a pillow, 
But to impart knowledge and useful instruction. 
If you use a sword for a tent-peg, 
You prefer the worse use of it to the better. 
Though the object of all men's being is wisdom, 
Yet each man has a different place of worship. 
The place of worship of the noble is nobility, 
The place of worship of the base is degradation. 
Smite the base to make them bow the head. 
Give to the noble to make them repay liberally. 
Inasmuch as the base are evil and arrogant, 
Hell and humbling are the "small gate" for them. 
Verily God has created two places of adoration, 
Hell for the base and increased bliss for the noble. 
Even so Moses made a small gate in Jerusalem, 
To make the Israelites bow the head in entering it. 

The discussion is continued and illustrated by anecdotes 
of the Sufi who preferred a table with no food upon it, 
because he ever sought "not-being," of Jacob's vision of 



217 
Book Three 

Joseph, and of a devout slave who obtained leave of his mas- 
ter to say his prayers in a mosque, but tarried there so long 
that the doors were shut, and he could not get out, nor his 
master in. The prophets at last despaired of making any 
impression upon the unbelievers, but called to mind the 
text "When at last the Apostles lost all hope, and deemed 
that they were reckoned as liars, our aid reached them, and 
we delivered whom we would, but our vengeance was not 

o 

averted from the wicked." 

The despair of the prophets. 

The prophets said, "How long, in our benevolence, 

Shall we give to this and that one good advice? 

How long shall we hammer cold iron in vain? 

How long waste breath in blowing into a lattice? 

Men are moved by God's decree and fixed ordinance, 

As sharp-set teeth are caused by heat of belly. 

'Tis Primal Soul that dominates the Second Soul, 

Fish begins to stink at the head, not the tail. 

Yet be advised and keep your steed straight as an arrow, 

When God says 'Proclaim' we must obey. 

O men, ye know not to which party ye belong, 

Exert yourselves then, till ye see which ye are. 

When you place goods upon a ship, 

You do it in trust that the voyage will be prosperous; 

You know not which of the two events will befall you, 



218 
The Masnavi 

Whether you will be drowned or come safe to land. 
If you say, 'Till I know which will be my fate 
I will not set foot upon the ship; 
Shall I be drowned on the voyage or a survivor? 
Reveal to me in which class I shall be. 
I shall not undertake the voyage on the chance 
On the bare hope of reaching land, as the rest do.' 
In that case no trade at all will be undertaken by you, 
As the secret of these two events is always hidden. 
The lamp of the heart, that is a timid trader, 
Acquires neither loss nor gain by its ventures. 
Nay, it acquires loss, for it is precluded from gain; 
'Tis the lamp that takes fire that acquires light. 
Since all things are dependent on probability, 
Religion is so first of all, for thereby you find release. 
In this world no knocking at the door is possible 
Save hope, and God knows what is best." 

Probability the guide of life in religion as well as in common 
matters. "Religion dependent an hope and fear. " 

The final cause of trading is hope or probability, 
When traders work themselves lean as spindles. 
When the merchant goes to his shop in the morning, 
He does so in hope and probability of gaining bread. 
If you have no hope of getting bread, why go? 



219 
Book Three 

There is the fear of loss, since you are not strong. 

But does not this fear of utter loss in your trade 

Become weakened in the course of your exertions? 

You say, "Although the fear of loss is before me, 

Yet I feel greater fear in remaining idle. 

I have a better hope through exerting myself; 

My fear is increased by remaining idle." 

Why then, O faint-hearted one, in the matter of religion 

Are you paralysed by the fear of loss? 

See you not how the traders in this market of ours 

Make large profits, both apostles and saints? 

What a mine of wealth awaits them on leaving it, 

Seeing they make such profits while still here! 

Fire is soft to them as cotton raiment, 

The ocean bears them gently like a porter; 

Iron in their hands is soft as wax, 

The winds are their obedient slaves. 

Notes: 

1. Koran xxxiv. 14. 

2. Anvar i Suhaili, chap. iv. Story IV. 

3. Koran xxxvi. 6. 

4. Koran lxi. 5: "God led their hearts astray." 

5. God said, "Come ye either in obedience, or in spite of your 
wishes" (Koran xli. 10). 



220 
The Masnavi 

6. Koran li. 56. 

7. See Koran ii. 55, with Sale's note. 

8 . Koran xii. 11. 

9. "All things have we created after a fixed decree, every action 
great and small is written." Koran liv. 49. 

10. The Logos or first Emanation produced the second or 
"Universal Soul." 

1 1. "O Apostle! proclaim all that hath been sent down" (Koran 
v. 71). 

12. "Which party," i.e., those doomed to be saved or those 
doomed to destruction. 

13. "Nothing shall be reckoned to a man save that for which he 
hath made effort" (Koran liii. 40). 

14. So Sa'di Bostan Book I. Cp. Butler's Analogy, Conclusion. 

15. i.e., exert themselves much. 



STORY XIV. Miracles performed by the Prophet 
Muhammad. 

It is related that the Prophet was once present at a ban- 
quet, and after he had eaten and drunk, his servant Anas 
threw the napkin which he had used into the fire, and the 
napkin was not burnt, 'but only purified by the fire. On 
another occasion a caravan of Arabs was traveling in the 
desert, and was in sore distress through lack of water, where- 



221 
Book Three 

upon the Prophet miraculously increased the water in a sin- 
gle water-skin, so that it sufficed to supply the needs of all 
the travelers. Moreover, the negro who carried the water- 
skin was rendered as white and fair as Joseph. Again, a hea- 
then woman came to the Prophet carrying her infant, aged 
only two months, and the infant saluted the Prophet as the 
veritable apostle of God. Again, when the prophet was 
about to put on his sandals, an eagle swooped down upon 
one of them and carried it off, when a viper was seen to 
drop from the sandal. The Prophet was at first inclined to 
grumble at this stroke of ill-luck; but when he saw the viper 
his discontent was turned into thankfulness to God, who 
had thus miraculously saved him from being bitten by the 
viper. 

In difficulties there is provided a way of salvation. 

In this tale there is a warning for thee, O Soul, 

That thou mayest acquiesce in God's ordinances, 

And be wary and not doubt God's benevolence, 

When sudden misfortunes befall thee. 

Let others grow pale from fear of ill fortune, 

Do thou smile like the rose at loss and gain; 

For the rose, though its petals be torn asunder, 

Still smiles on, and it is never cast down. 

It says, "Why should I fall into grief in disgrace? 



222 
The Masnavi 

I gather beauty even from the thorn of disgrace." 

Whatsoever is lost to thee through God's decree 

Know of a surety is so much gained from misfortune. 

What is Sufiism? 'Tis to find joy in the heart 

Whensoever distress and care assail it. 

Know troubles to be that eagle of the Prophet's 

Which carried off the sandal of that holy one, 

In order to save his foot from the bite of the viper 

O excellent device! to preserve him from harm. 

'Tis said, "Mourn not for your slaughtered cattle 

If a wolf has harried your flocks;" 

For that calamity may avert a greater calamity, 

And that loss may ward off a more grievous loss. 

Notes: 

1 . Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, vol. iii. p. 334. 



STORY XV. The Man who asked Moses to teach him the 
language of animals. 

A certain man came to Moses and desired to be taught the 
language of animals, for, he said, men used their language 
only to get food and for purposes of deception, and possibly 
a knowledge of animals' languages might stimulate his faith. 



223 
Book Three 

Moses was very unwilling to comply with his request, as he 
knew such knowledge would prove destructive to him, but, 
on his persisting, took counsel of God, and finally taught 
him the language of fowls and dogs. Next morning the man 
went amongst the fowls, and heard a discussion between the 
cock and the dog. The dog was abusing the cock for picking 
up the morsels of bread which fell from their master's table, 
because the cock could find plenty of grains of corn to eat, 
whereas the dog could only eat bread. The cock, to appease 
him, said that on the morrow the master's horse would die, 
and then the dog would have enough and to spare. The mas- 
ter, hearing this, at once sold his horse, and the dog, being 
disappointed of his meal, again attacked the cock. The cock 
then told him the mule would die, whereupon the master 
sold the mule. Then the cock foretold the death of a slave, 
and the master again sold the slave. At this the dog, losing 
patience, upbraided the cock as the chief of deceivers, and 
the cock excused himself by showing that all three deaths 
had taken place just as he had predicted, but the master had 
sold the horse, mule, and slave, and had thrown the loss on 
others. He added that, to punish him for his fraudulent deal- 
ing, the master would himself die on the morrow, and there 
would be plenty for the dog to eat at the funeral feast. 
Hearing this, the master went to Moses in great distress, and 
prayed to be saved. Moses besought the Lord for him, and 
gained permission that he should die in the peace of God. 



224 
The Masnavi 

Why freewill is good for man. 

God said, "Do thou grant his earnest request, 

Enlarge his faculty according to his freewill. 

Freewill is as the salt to piety, 

Otherwise heaven itself were matter of compulsion. 

In its revolutions reward and punishment were needless, 

For 'tis freewill that has merit at the great reckoning. 

If the whole world were framed to praise God, 

There would be no merit in praising God. 

Place a sword in his hand and remove his impotence, 

To see if he turns out a warrior or a robber. 

Because freewill is that wherewith 'we honor Adam,' 

Half the swarm become bees and half wasps. 

The faithful yield honeycombs like bees, 

The infidels yield store of poison like wasps. 

For the faithful feed on choice herbs, 

So that, like bees, their chyle yields life-giving food, 

Whilst infidels feed on filth and garbage, 

And generate poison according to their food." 

Men inspired of God are the fountain of life; 

Men of delusions are a synonym for death. 

In the world the praise "Well done faithful servant!" 

Is given to freewill which is used with prudence. 

If all dissolute men were shut up in prison, 

They would all be temperate and devout and pious. 



225 
Book Three 

When power of choice is absent actions are worthless; 
But beware lest death snatch away your capital! 
Your power of choice is a capital yielding profit, 
Remember well the day of final account! 

Notes: 

1. Koran xvii. 72. 



STORY XVI. The Woman who lost all her infants. 

A woman bore many children in succession, but none of 
them lived beyond the age of three or four months. In great 
distress she cried to God, and then beheld in a vision the 
beautiful gardens of Paradise, and many fair mansions 
therein, and upon one of these mansions she read her own 
name inscribed. And a voice from heaven informed her that 
God would accept the sorrows she had endured in lieu of 
her blood shed in holy war, as, owing to her sex, she was 
unable to go out to battle like the men. On looking again, 
the woman beheld in Paradise all the children she had lost, 
and she cried, "O Lord ! they were lost to me, but were safe 
with Thee!" 

This story is followed by anecdotos of Hamza going out 
to battle without his coat-of-mail, of the Prophet advising a 



226 
The Masnavi 

man who complained of being cheated in his bargains to 
take time before completing them, and of the death of Bilal, 
Muhammad's crier, and by illustrations of the illusive nature 
of the world, of the difference between things self-evident 
and mere matters of inference, and between knowing a 
thing through illustrations and on the authority of others 
and knowing it as it really is in its essence. 

The difference between knowing a thing merely by 

similitudes and on the authority of others, and 

knowing the very essence thereof. 

God's mercy is known through the fruits thereof, 

But who save God knows His essence? 

No one knows the very essence of God's attributes 

But only in their effects and by similitudes. 

A child knows naught of the nature of sexual intercourse, 

Except what you tell him, that it is like sweetmeats. 

Yet how far does the pleasure of sexual intercourse 

Really resemble that derived from sweetmeats? 

Nevertheless the fiction produces a relation 

Between you, with your perfect knowledge, and the child; 

So that the child knows the matter by a similitude, 

Though he knows not its essence or actual nature. 

Hence if he says, "I know it," 'tis not far wrong 

And if he says, "I know it not," 'tis not wrong. 



227 
Book Three 

Should one say, "Do you know Noah, 

That prophet of God and luminary of the Spirit?" 

If you say, "Do I not know him, for that moon 

Is more famed than the sun and moon of heaven? 

Little children in their schools, 

And elders in their mosques, 

All read his name prominently in the Koran, 

And preachers tell his story from times of yore;" 

You say true, for you know him by report, 

Though the real nature of Noah is not revealed to you. 

On the other hand, if you say, "What know I of Noah 

As his contemporaries knew him? 

I am a poor ant what can I know of the elephant? 

What knows a fly of the motions of the elephant?" 

This statement also is true, O brother, 

Seeing that you know not his real nature. 

But this impotence to perceive real essence, 

Though common to ordinary men, is not universal; 

Because essence and its deepest secrets 

Are open and manifest to the eyes of the perfect. 

Negation and affirmation of one proposition are lawful; 

When the aspects differ the relation is double. 

"Thou castest not when thou castest" shows such relation, 

Here negation and affirmation are both correct. 

Thou castest it, since it is in thy hand, 



228 
The Masnavi 

Thou castest not, since 'tis God who affords the strength. 

The might of the sons of Adam is limited, 

How can a handful of sand shatter an army? 

The sand was in man's hands, the casting was God's. 

Owing to the two relations negation and affirmation are 

both true. 
The infidels know the prophets, 
As well as they doubtless know their own children; 
Yea, the infidels know them as well as their own sons, 
By a hundred tokens and a hundred evidences, 
But from envy and malice conceal their knowledge, 
And incline themselves to say, "We know them not." 
So when God says in one place "knows them," 
In another He says, "None knows them beside me." 
For in truth they are hid under God's overshadowing, 
And none but God knows them by actual experience. 
Therefore take this declaration with its context, 
Remembering how you know and do not know Noah. 

Notes: 

1. There is a Hadis, "Think on God's mercies, and not on His 
essence." 

2. Koran viii. 17. Said of the sand cast into the eyes of the men 
of Mecca at Beder. 

3. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 354, where the commentator says the 
allusion is to Moses at Mount Sinai. Koran vii. 139. 



229 
Book Three 

STORY XVII. The Vakil of the Prince of Bokhara. 

The Prince of Bokhara had a Vakil who, through fear of 
punishment for an offence he had committed, ran away and 
remained concealed in Kuhistan and the desert for the space 
often years. At the end of that time, being unable to endure 
absence from his lord and his home any longer, he deter- 
mined to return to Bokhara and throw himself at his lord's 
feet, and endure whatever punishment his lord might be 
pleased to inflict upon him. His friends did all they could 
to dissuade him, assuring him that the Prince's wrath was 
still hot against him, and that if he appeared at Bokhara he 
would be put to death, or at least imprisoned for the rest of 
his life. He replied, "O advisers, be silent, for the force of 
the love which is drawing me to Bokhara is stronger than 
the force of prudent counsels. When love pulls one way all 
the wisdom of Abu Hanifa and Ash-Shafi'i is impotent to 
withstand it. If it shall please my lord to slay me, I will yield 
up my life without reluctance, for this life of estrangement 
from him which I am now leading is the same as death, and 
release from it will be eternal happiness. I will return to 
Bokhara and throw myself at my lord's feet, and say to him, 
'Deal with me as thou wilt, for I can no longer bear absence 
from thee, and life or death at thy hands is all the same to 
me!'" Accordingly, he journeyed back to Bokhara, counting 
the very toils and discomforts of the road sweet and delight- 
ful, because they were steps in his homeward course. When 



230 
The Masnavi 

he reached Bokhara his friends and relations all warned him 
not to show himself, as the Prince was still mindful of his 
offence and bent on punishing him; but he replied to them 
as to his other advisers, that he was utterly regardless of his 
life, and was resolved to commit himself to his lord's good 
pleasure. He then went to the court and threw himself at his 
lord's feet and swooned away. The Prince, seeing the strong 
affection borne to him by his repentant servant, conceived 
a similar affection towards him, and descended from his 
throne and graciously raised him from the ground, and par- 
doned his offence. Thus it is that eternal life is gained by 
utter abandonment of one's own life. When God appears to 
His ardent lover the lover is absorbed in Him, and not so 
much as a hair of the lover remains. True lovers are as shad- 
ows, and when the sun shines in glory the shadows vanish 
away. He is a true lover of God to whom God says, "I am 
thine, and thou art mine!" 

In the course of this story, which is narrated at great 
length, are introduced anecdotes of a lover and his mistress, 
of the Virgin Mary being visited by the "Blessed Spirit" or 
Angel Gabriel, of the fatal mosque, of Galen's devotion to 
carnal learning, of Satan's treachery to the men of Mecca at 
the battle of Bedr, and of Solomon and the gnat. There also 
occur comments on various texts, and a curious comparison 
of the trials and wholesome afflictions of the righteous to 



231 
Book Three 

the boiling of potherbs in a saucepan by the cook. 

The reply of the lover when asked by his mistress which city 
of all those he had seen was most pleasing in his sight. 

A damsel said to her lover, "O fond youth, 
You have visited many cities in your travels; 
Which of those cities seems most delightful to you?" 
He made answer, "The city wherein my love dwells. 
In whatever nook my queen alights, 
Though it be as the eye of a needle, 'tis a wide plain; 
Wherever her Yusuf-like face shines as a moon, 
Though it be the bottom of a well, 'tis Paradise. 
With thee, my love, hell itself were heaven, 
With thee a prison would be a rose-garden. 
With thee hell would be a mansion of delight, 
Without thee lilies and roses would be as flames of fire!" 

The answer of the Vakil to those who advised him not 
to court death by yielding himself up to his lord. 

He said, "I am a drawer of water; water attracts me, 
Even though I know water may be my death. 
No drawer of water flees from water, 
Even though it may cause him a hundred deaths. 
Though it may make my hand and belly dropsical, 



232 
The Masnavi 

My love for water will never be lessened. 

I should say, when they asked me about my belly, 

'Would that the ocean might flow into it!' 

Though the bottle of my belly were burst with water, 

And though I should die, my death would be acceptable. 

Wheresoever I see one seeking water, I envy him, 

And cry, 'Would I were in his place!' 

My hand is a tabor and my belly a drum, 

Like the rose I beat the drum of love of water. 

Like the earth or like a fetus I devour blood, 

Since I became a lover this is my occupation. 

If that 'Faithful Spirit' should shed my blood, 

I would drink it up drop by drop like the earth. 

At night I boil on the fire like a cooking-pot, 

From morn till eve I drink blood like the sand. 

It repents me that I planned a stratagem, 

And that I fled from before his wrath. 

Tell him to sate his wrath on my poor life, 

He is the 'Feast of Sacrifice,' and I his loving cow. 

The cow, whether it eats or sleeps, 

Thinks of naught but sacrificing itself. 

Know me to be that cow of Moses which gave its life, 

Each part of me gives life to the righteous. 

That cow of Moses was made a sacrifice, 

And its least part became a source of life. 

That murdered man leapt up from his deadness 

At the words, ' Strike the corpse with part of her.' 



233 
Book Three 

pious ones, slay the cow (of lust), 
If ye desire true life of soul and spirit! 

1 died as inanimate matter and arose a plant, 
I died as a plant and rose again an animal. 

I died as an animal and arose a man. 

Why then should I fear to become less by dying? 

I shall die once again as a man 

To rise an angel perfect from head to foot! 

Again when I suffer dissolution as an angel, 

I shall become what passes the conception of man! 

Let me then become non-existent, for non-existence 

Sings to me in organ tones, 'To him shall we return.' 

Know death to be the gathering together of the people. 

The water of life is hidden in the land of darkness. 

Like a water-lily seek life there! 

Yea, like that drawer of water, at the risk of life, 

Water will be his death, yet he still seeks water, 

And still drinks on, and God knows what is right. 

O lover, cold-hearted and void of loyalty, 

Who from fear for your life shun the beloved! 

O base one, behold a hundred thousand souls 

Dancing towards the deadly sword of his love: 

Behold water in a pitcher; pour it out; 

Will that water run away from the stream? 

When that water joins the water of the stream 

It is lost therein, and becomes itself the stream. 



234 
The Masnavi 

Its individuality is lost, but its essence remains, 
And hereby it becomes not less nor inferior. 
I will hang myself upon my lord's palm-tree 
In excuse for having fled away from him!" 

Even as a ball rolling along on head and face, 

He fell at the feet of the Prince with streaming eyes. 

The people were all on the alert, expecting 

That the Prince would burn him or hang him, 

Saying, "Moth-like he has seen the blaze of the light, 

And fool-like has plunged therein and lost his life." 

But the torch of love is not like that torch, 

'Tis light, light in the midst of light, 

'Tis the reverse of torches of fire, 

It appears to be fire, but is all sweetness. 



Love generates love. "If ye love God, God will love you. " 



That Bokharian then cast himself into the flame, 
But his love made the pain endurable; 
And as his burning sighs ascended to heaven, 
The love of the Prince was kindled towards him. 

The heart of man is like the root of a tree, 

o 

Therefrom grow the leaves on firm branches. 
Corresponding to that root grow up branches 
As well on the tree as on souls and intellects. 



235 
Book Three 

The tops of the perfect trees reach the heavens, 

The roots firm, and the branches in the sky. 

Since then the tree of love has grown up to heaven, 

How shall it not also grow in the heart of the Prince? 

A wave washes away the remembrance of the sin from his 

heart, 
For from each heart is a window to other hearts. 
Since in each heart there is a window to other hearts, 
They are not, separated and shut off like two bodies. 
Thus, even though two lamp-dishes be not joined, 
Yet their light is united in a single ray. 
No lover ever seeks union with his beloved, 
But his beloved is also seeking union with him. 
But the lover's love makes his body lean, 
While the beloved's love makes hers fair and lusty. 
When in this heart the lightning spark of love arises, 
Be sure this love is reciprocated in that heart. 
When the love of God arises in thy heart, 
Without doubt God also feels love for thee. 

The noise of clapping of hands is never heard 

From one of thy hands unaided by the other hand 

The man athirst cries, "Where is delicious water?" 

Water too cries, "Where is the water-drinker?" 

This thirst in my soul is the attraction of the water; 

I am the water's and the water is mine. 

God's wisdom in His eternal foreknowledge and decree 



236 
The Masnavi 

Made us to be lovers one of the other. 

Nay more, all the parts of the world by this decree 

Are arranged in pairs, and each loves its mate. 

Every part of the world desires its mate, 

Just as amber attracts blades of straw. 

Heaven says to earth, "All hail to thee! 

We are related to one another as iron and magnet." 

Heaven is man and earth woman in character; 

Whatever heaven sends it, earth cherishes. 

When earth lacks heat, heaven sends heat; 

When it lacks moisture and dew, heaven sends them. 

The earthy sign succours the terrestrial earth, 

The watery sign (Aquarius) sends moisture to it; 

The windy sign sends the clouds to it, 

To draw off unwholesome exhalations. 

The fiery sign (Leo) sends forth the heat of the sun, 

Like a dish heated red-hot in front and behind. 

The heaven is busily toiling through ages, 

Just as men labor to provide food for women. 

And the earth does the woman's work, and toils 

In bearing offspring and suckling them. 

Know then earth and heaven are endued with sense, 

Since they act like persons endued with sense. 

If these two lovers did not suck nutriment from each 

other, 
Why should they creep together like man and wife? 
Without the earth how could roses and saffron grow? 



237 
Book Three 

For naught can grow from the sole heat and rain of heaven. 

This is the cause of the female seeking the male, 

That the work of each may be accomplished. 

God has instilled mutual love into man and woman, 

That the world may be perpetuated by their union. 

Earth says to the earth of the body, "Come away, 

Quit the soul and come to me as dust. 

Thou art of my genus, and wilt be better with me, 

'Thou had'st better quit the soul and fly to me!" 

Body replies "True, but my feet are fast bound, 

Though like thee I suffer from separation." 

Water calls out to the moisture of the body, 

"O moisture, return to me from your foreign abode!" 

Fire also calls out to the heat of the body, 

"Thou art of fire; return to thy root!" 

In the body there are seventy-and-two diseases; 

It is ill compacted owing to the struggle of its elements. 

Disease comes to rend the body asunder, 

And to drag apart its constituent elements. 

The four elements are as birds tied together by the feet; 

Death, sickness and disease loose their feet asunder. 

The moment their feet are loosed from the others, 

'The bird of each element flies off by itself. 

The repulsion of each of these principles and causes 

Inflicts every moment a fresh pang on our bodies. 



238 
The Masnavi 

That it may dissolve these composite bodies of ours, 
The bird of each part tries to fly away to its origin; 
But the wisdom of God prevents this speedy end, 
And preserves their union till the appointed day. 
He says, "O parts, the appointed time is not yet; 
It is useless for you to take wing before that day." 

But as each part desires reunion with its original, 
How is it with the soul who is a stranger in exile? 
It says, "O parts of my habitation here below, 
My absence is sadder than yours, as I am heaven-born. 
The body loves green pastures and running water, 
For this cause that its origin is from them. 
The love of the soul is for life and the living one, 
Because its origin is the Soul not bound to place. 
The love of the soul is for wisdom and knowledge, 
That of the body for houses, gardens, and vineyards; 
The love of the soul is for things exalted on high, 
That of the body for acquisition of goods and food. 
The love too of Him on high is directed to the soul: 
Know this for 'He loves them that love Him.'" 
The sum is this, that whoso seeks another, 
The soul of that other who is sought inclines to him. 

Let us quit the subject. Love for that soul athirst 
Was kindled in the breast of the Prince of Bokhara. 



239 
Book Three 

The smoke of that love and the grief of that burning heart 
Ascended to his master and excited his compassion. 

The praises addressed to the Prince by the Vakil. 

He said, "O phoenix of God and goal of the spirit 

I thank thee that thou hast come back from Mount Qaf] 

O Israfil of the resurrection-day of love, 

O love, love, and heart's desire of love! 

Let thy first boon to me be this, 

To lend thine ear to my orisons. 

Though thou knowest my condition clearly, 

O protector of slaves, listen to my speech. 

A thousand times, O prince incomparable, 

Has my reason taken flight in desire to see thee, 

And to hear thee and to listen to thy words, 

And to behold thy life-giving smiles. 

Thy inclining thine ear to my supplications 

Is as a caress to my misguided soul. 

The baseness of my heart's coin is known to thee, 

But thou hast accepted it as genuine coin. 

Thou art proud towards the arrogant and proud; 

All clemencies are as naught to thy clemency. 

First hear this, that while I remained in absence, 

First and last alike escaped me. 

Secondly, hear this. O prince beloved, 



240 
The Masnavi 

That I searched much, but found no second to thee. 

Thirdly, that when I had departed outside thee, 

I said it was like the Christian Trinity. 

Fourthly, when my harvest was burned up, 

I knew not the fourth from the fifth. 

Wheresoever thou findest blood on the roads, 

Trace it, and 'tis tears of blood from my eyes. 

My words are thunder, and these sighs and tears 

Are drawn by it as rain from the clouds. 

I am distracted between speaking and weeping. 

Shall I weep, or shall I speak, or what shall I do? 

If I speak, my weeping ceases; 

If I weep, I cease to praise and magnify thee." 

He spoke thus, and then fell to weeping, 

So that high and low wept with him. 

So many "Ahs" and "Alases" proceeded from his heart, 

That the people of Bokhara formed a circle round him. 

Talking sadly, weeping sadly, smiling sadly, 

Men and women, small and great, were all assembled. 

The whole city wept in concert with him; 

Men and women mingled together as on the last day. 

Then Heaven said to Earth, 

"If you never saw a resurrection-day, see it here!" 

Reason was amazed, saying, "What love, what ecstasy! 

Is his separation more wondrous, or his reunion?" 



241 
Book Three 

Notes: 

1. Koran xix. 18. 

2. Koran viii. 10. 

3. The Id ul Azha, or the Feast of Sacrifices, held on the tenth 
day of the month Zul Hijja. It is also called "The Cow 
Festival." 

4. This refers to Koran ii. 63. The cow was to be sacrificed in 
order that a murderer might be discovered by striking the 
corpse with a piece of her flesh. 

5. i.e., Earth losing its own form becomes vegetable, vegetable 
again perishes to feed and be transmuted into animal, , and 
in like manner animal becomes man. See the passage of 
Milton quoted below, and Gulshan i Raz, I. 490 and note. 

6. Koran ii. 153: "Verily we are God's, and to Him shall we 
return." 

7. Koran iii. 29. 

8. "Seest thou not to what God likeneth a good word? To a 
good tree, its root firmly fixed, and its branches in the heav- 
en" (Koran xiv. 29). 

9. i.e., of the zodiac. 

10. Koran v. 59. 

11. "They surely are infidels who say, 'God is the third of three,' 

for there is no God but one God" (Koran v. 77). 



242 
The Masnavi 

STORY XVIII. The Deadly Mosque. 

In the suburbs of a certain city there was a mosque in 
which none could sleep a night and live. Some said it was 
haunted by malevolent fairies; others, that it was under the 
baneful influence of a magic spell; some proposed to put up 
a notice warning people not to sleep there, and others 
advised that the door should be kept locked. At last a 
stranger came to that city and desired to sleep in the 
mosque, saying that he did not fear to risk his life, as the life 
of the body was naught, and God has said, "Wish for death 
if you are sincere." The men of the city warned him again 
and again of the danger, and rebuked him for his foolhardi- 
ness, reminding him that not improbably Satan was tempt- 
ing him to his own destruction, as he tempted the men of 
Mecca at the battle of Bedr. The stranger, however, would 
not be dissuaded, but persisted in his purpose of sleeping in 
the mosque. He said that he was as one of the devoted 
agents of the Ismailians, who were always ready to sacrifice 
their lives at the bidding of their chiefs, and that the terrors 
of death did not appal him any more than the noise of a lit- 
tle drum beaten by a boy to scare away birds could appal the 
great drum-bearing camel that used to march at the head of 
King Mahmud's army. Accordingly, he slept in the mosque, 
and at midnight he was awakened by a terrible voice, as of 
one about to attack him. But instead of being dismayed, he 



243 
Book Three 

bethought himself of the text "Assault them with thy horse- 
men and thy footmen," and confronted his unseen foe, 
challenging him to show himself and stand to his arms. At 
these words the spell was dissipated, and showers of gold fell 
on all sides, which the brave hero proceeded to appropriate. 

The "knowledge of certainty" and the "eye of certainty". 

Our body and substance are snow, doomed to perish, 

God is He who buys them, for "God hath bought them." 

You prefer this perishing snow to God's price 

Because you are in doubt and have not certainty; 

And, strange to say, opinion abides in you, O weak one, 

And never flies away to the garden of certainty. 

Every opinion is aiming at certainty, O son, 

And more and more moves its wings towards certainty. 

When it reaches knowledge it stands erect, 

And its knowledge again hastes on towards certainty, 

Because in the approved road of the faith 

Knowledge is lower than certainty, but above opinion. 

Know knowledge aspires to certainty, 

And certainty again to sight and ocular evidence. 

In the chapter, "Desire of riches occupieth you," 

After "Nay," read "Would that ye knew!" 

Knowledge conducts you to sight, O knower! 

"If ye are certain, ye shall see hell-fire." 



244 
The Masnavi 

Sight follows on certainty with no interval, 

Just as reasoned knowledge is born of opinion. 

See the account of this in the chapter cited, 

How knowledge of certainty becomes the eye of certainty. 

As for me, I am above both opinion and certainty; 

My head is not affected by your cavils. 

Since my mouth has eaten of His sweetmeats, 

I am become clear-sighted, and see him face to face! 

The righteous are exposed to trials for their improvement, 
as potherbs are boiled to make them fit for food. 

Behold these potherbs boiling in the pot, 

How they jump and toss about in the heat of the fire. 

Whilst they are boiling, they keep leaping up, 

Even to the top of the pot, and utter cries, 

Saying to the housewife, "Why do you set us on the fire? 

Now you have bought us, why should you afflict us?" 

The housewife pushes them down with her spoon, saying, 

"Be still, and boil well, and leap not off the fire. 

I do not boil you because I dislike you, 

But that you may acquire a good savor and taste. 

When you become food you will be mingled with life; 

This trial is not imposed on you to distress you. 

In the garden you drank water soft and fresh; 

That water-fed one was reserved for this fire. 



245 
Book Three 

Mercy was first shown to it before vengeance, 
That mercy might train it to be proof against trial; 
Mercy was shown to it previously to vengeance, 
That it might acquire its substance of being. 
Because flesh and skin grow not without tender care, 
How should they not grow when warmed by the Friend's 

love. 
If vengeance follows as a necessary consequence, 
That you may make an offering of that substance, 
Mercy follows again to compensate for it, 
That you may be purified and raised above your nature. 

I am Abraham, and you his son under the knife. 

Lay down your head! 'I have seen I must sacrifice you.' 

Yield your head to vengeance, your heart to constancy, 

That I may cut your throat like an Ismailian's. 

I cut off your head, but that head is such 

That it is restored to life by being cut off!" 

My main object herein is to inculcate resignation, 
O Mosalman! it behoves you to seek resignation. 
O potherbs, you boil in trials and sufferings 
That neither existence nor self may remain in you. 
Though you once smiled in that earthly garden, 
You are really roses of the garden of life and sight. 
If you are torn away from the garden of earth, 



246 
The Masnavi 

You become sweet food to revive man's life; 

o 

Yea, become his food and strength and thought! 

You were only milk, you become a lion of the forest! 

You issue from God's attributes at first; 

Return again back to those attributes with all speed! 

You come from the clouds and sunshine and sky, 

Then assume moral qualities and ascend the sky. 

You come in the form of rain and sunshine, 

You depart endued with excellent attributes. 

You begin as a part of the sun, clouds, and stars, 

You rise to be breath, act, word, and thought! 

The life of animals comes from the death of plants. 

True is the saying, 'Kill me, O faithful ones!' 

Since such exaltation awaits us after death. 

True it is that 'In our death is life.' 

Acts, words, and faith are the food of the King, 

So that in this ascent one attains to heaven. 

Thus, as potherbs become the food of men, 

They rise above the grade of minerals to that of animals. 



tions of fools to the Masnavi. 



A certain goose pops his head out of his coop, 

And displays himself as a critic of the Masnavi, 

Saying, "This poem, the Masnavi, is childish; 

'Tis but a story of the prophets, and so on. 

'Tis not an account of the arguments and deep mysteries, 



247 
Book Three 

Whereto holy men direct their attention; 

Concerning asceticism, and so on to self-annihilation, 

Step by step, up to communion with God; 

An explanation and definition of each several state, 

Whereto the men of heart ascend in their flight." 

Whereas the Book of God resembles the Masnavi in this, 

The infidels abused it, in the same manner, 

Saying, 'It contains old tales and stories; 

There is no deep analysis or lofty investigation therein. 

Little boys can understand it; 

It only contains commands and prohibitions, 

Accounts of Yusuf and his curled locks, 

Accounts of Jacob, of Zulaikha and her love, 

Accounts of Adam, of the wheat, and of the serpent Iblis, 

Accounts of Hud, of Noah, of Abraham, and the fire." 

Know the words of the Koran are simple, 

But within the outward sense is an inner secret one. 

Beneath that secret meaning is a third, 

Whereat the highest wit is dumbfoundered. 

The fourth meaning has been seen by none 

Save God, the Incomparable and All-sufficient. 

Thus they go on, even to seven meanings, one by one, 

According to the saying of the Prophet, without doubt. 

Do thou, O son, confine not thy view to the outward 

meaning, 
Even as the demons saw in Adam only clay 



248 
The Masnavi 

The outward meaning of the Koran is like Adam's body, 
For its semblance is visible, but its soul is hidden. 

O reviling dog! thou makest a clamour, 

1 2 

Thou makest thy abuse of the Koran thy destruction. 
This is not a lion, wherefrom thou canst save thy life, 
Or canst secure thyself from his talons! 
The Koran cries out even to the last day, 
"O people, given up as a prey to ignorance, 
If ye have imagined me to be only empty fables, 
Ye have sown the seed of reviling and infidelity. 
Ye yourselves who abuse me will see yourselves 
Annihilated, and made like a tale that is told!" 

Solomon and the gnat. 

A gnat came in from the garden and fields, 

And called on Solomon for justice, 

Saying, "O Solomon, you extend your equity 

Over demons and the sons of Adam and fairies. 

Fish and fowl dwell under the shelter of your justice; 

Where is the oppressed one whom your mercy has not 

sought? 
Grant me redress, for I am much afflicted, 
Being cut off from my garden and meadow haunts." 



249 
Book Three 

Then Solomon replied, "O seeker of redress, 

Tell me from whom do you desire redress? 

Who is the oppressor, who, puffed up with arrogance 

Has oppressed you and smitten your face?" 

The gnat replied, "He from whom I seek redress is the 

Wind, 
'Tis he who has emitted the smoke of oppression at 

me; 
Through his oppression I am in a grievous strait, 
Through him I drink blood with parched lip!" 

Solomon replied to him, "O sweet voiced one, 

You must hear the command of God with all your heart. 

God has commanded me saying, 'O dispenser of justice, 

Never hear one party without the other!' 

Till both parties come into the presence, 

The truth is never made plain to the judge." 

When the Wind heard the summons, it came swiftly, 

And the gnat instantly took flight. 

In like manner the seekers of God's presence-seat, 

When God appears, those seekers vanish. 

Though that union is life eternal, 

Yet at first that life is annihilation. 



250 
The Masnavi 

Notes: 

1. Koran ii. 88. 

2. Koran viii. 50 

3. Koran xvii. 66. 

4. "Verily of the faithful hath God bought their persons and 
their substance, on condition of Paradise for them in return" 
(Koran ix. 112). 

5. "The desire of riches occupieth you till ye come to the 
grave. Nay! but in the end ye shall know. Nay! would that ye 
knew it with knowledge of certainty. Surely ye shall see hell- 
fire. Ye shall surely see it with the eye of certainty" (Koran 
cii.) 

6. Koran xxxvii. 101. 

7. According to its etymology. Islam means self-surrender to 
God as well as safety, peace, and obedience to divine laws. 

8. Cp. Milton, Paradise Lost, v. 482: 

"Flow'rs and their fruit, 

Man's nourishment, by gradual scale sublim'd, 

To vital spirits aspire, to animal, 

To intellectual." 

9. Koran xxvii. 7. 

10. There is a Hadis to the effect that each word of the Koran 
has seven meanings. See Koran iii. 5. 

1 1. Koran xvii. 63. 



251 
Book Three 

12. The Lucknow commentator says that Faizi (brother of Abul 
Fazl Akbar's minister) once spoke disrespectfully of the 
Koran and the Masnavi, and on the leaves being turned 
over, this passage presented itself. 

The book ends with the beginning of a story which is 
finished in the fourth book. 



THE SPIRITUAL COUPLETS 

OF 

MAULANA JALALU-'D-D1N MUHAMMAD RUMI 



Book IV. 

STORY I. The Lover and his Mistress. 

THE fourth book begins with an address to Husamu-'d- 
Din, and this is followed by the story of the lover and his 
mistress, already commenced in the third book. A certain 
lover had been separated from his mistress for the space of 
seven years, during which he never relaxed his efforts to find 
her. At last his constancy and perseverance were rewarded, 
in accordance with the promises "The seeker shall find," 
and "Whoso shall have wrought an atom's weight of good 
shall behold it." One night, as he was wandering through 
the city, he was pursued by the patrol, and, in order to 
escape them, took refuge in a garden, where he found his 
long-sought mistress. This occasioned him to reflect how 
often men "hate the things that are good for them," and 
led him to bless the rough patrol who had procured him the 
bliss of meeting with his mistress. Apropos of this, an anec- 
dote is told of a preacher who was in the habit of blessing 
robbers and oppressors, because their evil example had 
turned him to righteousness. The moment the lover found 
himself alone with his mistress, he attempted to embrace 
her, but his mistress repulsed him, saying, that though no 
men 'were present, yet the wind was blowing and that 



254 
The Masnavi 

showed that God, the mover of the wind, was also present. 
The lover replied, "It may be I am lacking in good manners, 
but I am not lacking in constancy and fidelity towards you." 
His mistress replied, "One must judge of the hidden by the 
manifest; I see for myself that your outward behavior is bad, 
and thence I cannot but infer that your boast of hidden 
virtues is not warranted by actual facts. You are ashamed to 
misconduct yourself in the sight of men, but have no scru- 
ple to do so in the presence of the All-seeing God, and 
hence I doubt the existence of the virtuous sentiments 
which you claim to possess, but which can only be known 
to yourself." To illustrate this, she told the story of a Sufi 
and his faithless wife. This wife was one day entertaining a 
paramour, when she was surprised by the sudden return of 
her husband. On the spur of the moment she threw a 
woman's dress over her paramour and presented him to her 
husband as a rich lady who had come to propose a marriage 
between her son and the Sufi's daughter, saying she did not 
care for wealth, but only regarded modesty and rectitude of 
conduct. To this the Sufi replied, that as from her coming 
unattended it was plain that the lady had not the wealth she 
pretended to have, it was more than probable that her pre- 
tensions to extraordinary modesty and humility were also 
fictitious. The lover then proceeded to excuse himself by the 
plea that he had wished to test his mistress, and ascertain for 
himself whether she was a modest woman or not. He said 
he of course knew beforehand that she would prove to be a 



255 
Book Four 

modest woman, but still he wished to have ocular demon- 
stration of the fact. His mistress reproved him for trying to 
deceive her with false pretences, assuring him that, after he 
had been detected in a fault, his only proper course was to 
confess it, as Adam had done. Moreover, she added that an 
attempt to put her to the test would have been an extreme- 
ly unworthy proceeding, only to be paralleled by Abu Jahl's 
attempt to prove the truth of the Prophet's claims by calling 
on him to perform a miracle. 

The soul of good in things evil. Evil only relative. 

The lover invoked blessings on that rough patrol, 

Because their harshness had wrought bliss for him. 

They were poison to most men, but sweets to him, 

Because those harsh ones had united him with his love. 

In the world there is nothing absolutely bad; 

Know, moreover, evil is only relative. 

In the world there is neither poison nor antidote, 

Which is not a foot to one and a fetter to another; 

To one the power of moving, to another a clog; 

To one a poison, to another an antidote. 

Serpents' poison is life to serpents, 

In relation to mankind it is death. 

To the creatures of the sea the sea is a garden, 

To the creatures of the land it is fatal. 

In the same way, O man, reckon up with intelligence 



256 
The Masnavi 

The relations of these things in endless variety. 

In relation to this man Zaid is as Satan, 

In relation to another he is as a Sultan. 

The latter calls Zaid a sincere Mussulman, 

The former calls him a Gueber deserving to be killed. 

Zaid, one and the same person, is life to the one, 

And to the other an annoyance and a pest. 

If you desire that God may be pleasing to you, 

Then look at Him with the eyes of them that love Him. 

Look not at that Beauty with your own eyes, 

Look at that Object of desire with His votaries' eyes; 

Shut your own eyes from beholding that sweet Object, 

And borrow from His admirers their eyes; 

Nay, borrow from Him both eyes and sight, 

And with those eyes of His look upon His face, 

In order that you may not be disappointed with the sight. 

God says, "Whoso is God's, God also is his." 

God says, "I am his eye, his hand, his heart," 

That his good fortune may emerge from adversity. 

Whatsoever is hateful to you, if it should lead you 

To your beloved, at once becomes agreeable to you. 

Why God is named "Hearing, " "Seeing" and "Knowing". 

God calls himself "Seeing," to the end that 

His eye may every moment scare you from sinning. 



257 
Book Four 

God calls himself "Hearing," to the end that 

You may close your lips against foul discourse. 

God calls himself "Knowing," to the end that 

You may be afraid to plot evil. 

These names are not mere accidental names of God, 

As a negro may be called Kafu'r (white); 

They are names derived from God's essential attributes, 

Not mere vain titles of the First Cause. 

For if so, they would be only empty pleasantries, 

Like calling the deaf a hearer and the blind a seer, 

Or a name like "impudent" for a modest man, 

Or "beautiful" for an ugly negro, 

Or such a title as "Haji" for a new-born boy, 

Or that of "Ghazi" applied to a noble idler. 

If such titles as these are used in praising persons 

Who do not possess the qualities implied, 'tis wrong; 

'Twould be jesting or mockery or madness. 

"God is exalted above" what is said by evil men. 

I knew you before I met you face to face; 
That you had a fair face but an evil heart; 
Yea, I knew you before I saw you, 
That you were rooted in iniquity through guile. 
When my eye is red owing to inflammation, 
I know 'tis so from the pain, though I see it not. 
You regarded me as a lamb without a shepherd; 
You fancied that I had no guardian. 



258 
The Masnavi 

Lovers have suffered chastisement for this cause, 
That they have cast ill-timed looks at fair ones. 
They have supposed the fawn to have no shepherd, 
They have supposed the captive to be going a begging; 
Till in the twinkling of an eye an arrow pierces them, 
Saying, "I am her guardian; look not at her rashly!" 
What! am I less than a lamb or a fallow deer, 
That I should have none to shepherd me? 
Nay, I have a Guardian worthy of dominion, 
Who knows every wind that blows upon me. 
He is aware whether that wind is chill or mild, 
He is not ignorant nor absent, O mean one. 
The carnal soul is made by God blind and deaf; 
I saw with the heart's eye your blindness afar off. 
For this cause I never inquired about you for eight years 
Because I saw you filled with ignorance and duplicity. 
Why indeed should I inquire about one in the furnace, 
Who is bowed down with reproach, like yourself? 

Comparison of the world to a bath stove, 
and of piety to the hot bath. 

The lust of the world is like a bath stove, 
Whereby the bath of piety is heated; 
But the lot of the pious is purity from the stove's filth, 
Because they dwell in the bath and in cleanliness. 



259 
Book Four 

The rich are as those that carry dung 
To heat the furnace of the bath withal. 
God has instilled into them cupidity, 
That the bath may be warmed and pleasant. 
Quit this stove and push on into the bath; 
Know quitting the stove to be the bath itself. 
Whoso is in the stove-room is as a servant 
To him who is temperate and prudent. 

Your lust is as fire in the world, 

With a hundred greedy mouths wide open. 

In the judgment of reason this gold is foul dung, 

Although, like dung, it serves to kindle the fire. 

Whoso was born in the stove-room and never saw purity, 
The smell of sweet musk is disagreeable to him. 

In illustration of this, a story follows of a tanner who was 
accustomed to bad smells in the course of his trade, and 
who was half killed by the smell of musk in the bazaar of the 
perfumers, but was cured by the accustomed smell of dung. 

Notes: 

1 . Koran xcix. 7. 

2. Koran ii. 213. 



260 
The Masnavi 

3. "My servant draws nigh to me by pious deeds till I love him, 
and, when I love him, I am his eye, his ear, his tongue, his 
foot, his hand, and by me he sees, hears, talks, walks, and 
feels." Hadis. 

4. Cp. Koran xvi 3. 



STORY II. The Building of the 
"Most Remote Temple" at Jerusalem. 

King David purposed to build a temple at Jerusalem, but 
was forbidden to do so by a divine voice, because he had 
been a man of blood. But, it was added, the work should be 
accomplished by his son Solomon, and Solomon's work 
would be reckoned the same as David's, in accordance with 
the texts, "The faithful are brethren," and "Sages are as a 
single soul," and "We make no distinction between any of 
the apostles." Accordingly, when Solomon came to the 
throne, he set about the building, which was attended with 
many miraculous circumstances, e.g., the stones in the 
quarry crying out and moving of themselves to the site of 
the temple. Bilqis, Queen of Saba, sent Solomon a present 
of forty camels laden with ingots of gold; but Solomon 
would not receive them, and sent her messengers back with 
a letter commanding her to abandon the worship of the sun 
and embrace Islam. At the same time he charged the mes- 



261 
Book Four 

sengers to report fully to the Queen all they had seen in his 
kingdom, and to urge her to comply with his commands to 
renounce her sovereignty and present herself in all humility 
at his court. As she delayed to come, Solomon again sent to 
assure her that he had no sinister views regarding her, and 
desired her attendance at his court solely for her own spiri- 
tual benefit. At last Bilqis renounced her royal state and cast 
away all care for worldly things, and, impelled by earnest 
desire to learn the true faith, presented herself at the court 
of King Solomon. Then Solomon commanded that the 
throne of Bilqis should be brought from Saba, and an Afrit 
offered to fetch it, but Asaf, the vizier anticipated him. 
Afterwards Solomon proceeded with the building of the 
temple, wherein he was assisted by devils and fairies. Then 
God tried Solomon by placing on his throne a false coun- 
terpart of him. His miracle working signet was stolen by a 
devil named Sakhar who thereupon assumed his shape and 
personated him for forty days, during which Solomon had 
to wander about and beg his bread. After this he regained 
his throne, and having completed the temple, began to wor- 
ship therein. One day he observed that a tuft of coarse grass 
had sprung up in a corner of the temple, and he was great- 
ly distressed because he thought it portended the ruin of the 
building, but he took comfort from the thought that while 
he himself lived the temple would not be allowed to fall into 
ruin; so long as he lived, at least, he would root up all evil 



262 
The Masnavi 

weeds that threatened the safety of the temple, as well the 
temple built with hands as the spiritual temple in his heart. 

In the course of this story, which is told at great length, 
there occur anecdotes of the beginning of the reign of 
'Othman, of the miracles of 'Abdullah Moghrabi, and oth- 
ers, of which abstracts are given below. 

Though philosophers call man the microcosm, 
divines call him the macrocosm. 

In outward form thou art the microcosm, 

But in reality the macrocosm. 

Seemingly the bough is the cause of the fruit, 

But really the bough exists because of the fruit. 

Were he not impelled by desire of fruit, 

The gardener would never have planted the tree. 

Therefore in reality the tree is born from the fruit, 

Though seemingly the fruit is born from the tree. 

For this cause Mustafa said, "Adam and all prophets 

Are my followers and gather under my standard. 

Though to outward view I am a son of Adam, 

In reality I am his first forefather, 

Because the angels worshipped him for my sake, 

And 'twas in my footsteps that he ascended to heaven. 

Hence in reality our first parent was my offspring, 

As in reality the tree is born of its own fruit." 



263 
Book Four 

What is first in thought is last in act. 

Thought is the special attribute of the Eternal. 

This product goes forth from heaven very swiftly, 

And comes to us like a caravan. 

'Tis not a long road that this caravan travels; 

Can the desert stop the deliverer? 

The heart travels to the Ka'ba every moment, 

And by divine grace the body acquires the same power. 

Distance and nearness affect only the body, 

What do they matter in the place where God is? 

When God changes the body, 

It regards not parasangs or miles. 

Even on earth there is hope of approaching God. 

Press on like a lover, and cease vain words, O son! 

In the course of his rebuke to the messengers of Bilqis for 
bringing him mere gold instead of a humble heart, Solomon 
tells the story of the druggist who used soapstone or Persian 
earth for a weight. A man came to him to buy sugar-candy, 
and as he had no weight at hand, he used a lump of soap- 
stone instead; but, while his back was turned, the purchaser 
stole a bit of the soapstone. The druggist, though he saw 
what he was doing, would not interrupt him, for he knew 
that the more soapstone the purchaser stole, the less sugar- 
candy he would get. In like manner the more men grasp at 
the transitory wealth of this world, the less they will obtain 
of the stable wealth of the world to come. 



264 
The Masnavi 

Part of Soloman's message to Bilqis. 

Report to Bilqis what marvels ye have seen, 

And what plains of gold belong to Solomon; 

How ye beheld forty mansions faced with gold, 

And how ye were ashamed of your presents; 

That she may know Solomon is not covetous of gold; 

He has received gold from the Creator of gold. 

The moment he wills it, every grain of earth's dust 

Is changed into gold and precious pearls. 

For this cause, O thou that lovest gold, 

On the last day God will make earth all silver (white). 

Quit thy wealth, even if it be the realm of Saba; 
Thou wilt find many realms not of this earth. 
What thou callest a throne is only a prison; 
Thou thinkest thyself enthroned, but art outside the 

door. 
Thou hast no sovereignty over thine own passions, 
How canst thou sway good and evil? 
Thy hair turns white without thy concurrence, 
Take shame to thyself for thy evil passions. 
Whoso bows his head to the King of kings 
Will receive a hundred kingdoms not of this world; 
But the delight of bowing down before God 
Will seem sweeter to thee than countless glories." 



265 
Book Four 

An anecdote follows of a darvesh who saw in a dream 
some saints, and prayed them to provide him with his daily 
bread without obliging him to mix in worldly affairs. The 
saints ordered him to go to the forest, and there he found 
that all the wild fruits were rendered fit for his food. Having 
a few grains of gold by him, which he had gained by world- 
ly labour before this miracle had been wrought for him, he 
was about to give them to a poor woodcutter who was pass- 
ing that way. But this woodcutter was a saint, and at once 
read his thoughts, and to show, like Solomon, that he had 
no need of worldly wealth, he offered up a short prayer to 
God, and straightway his bundle of firewood was changed 
into gold, and immediately after, at another prayer, was 
changed back again into firewood. 

o 

Ibrahim bin Adham aud bis fondness for music. 

Haste to renounce thy kingdom, like Ibrahim bin 

Adham, 
To obtain, like him, the kingdom of eternity. 
At night that king would sleep on his throne, 
With his guards of state surrounding his palace, 
Though he needed no guards for the purpose 
Of warding off robbers and vagabonds; 
For he who is a just king knows everything, 
And is safe from harm and his mind is at peace. 



266 
The Masnavi 

Justice is the guardian of his steps, 

Not guards with drums round his palace. 

His purpose in having this band of music was this, 

To recall to his longing heart that call of God. 

The wailing of horn and the thunder of drum 

Resemble in some sort that dread "trumpet blast." 

Wherefore philosophers say that we have learned 

Our melodies from those of the revolving spheres. 

The song of the spheres in their revolutions 

Is what men sing with lute and voice. 

The faithful hold that the sweet influences of heaven 

Can make even harsh voices melodious. 

As we are all members of Adam, 

We have heard these melodies in Paradise; 

Though earth and water have cast their veil upon us, 

We retain faint reminiscences of those heavenly songs. 

But while we are thus shrouded by gross earthly veils, 

How can the tones of the dancing spheres reach us? 

Hence it is that listening to music is lovers' food, 
Because it recalls to them their primal union with 

God. 
The inward feelings of the mind acquire strength, 
Nay, are shown outwardly, under influence of music. 
The fire of love burns hotter under stimulus of music, 
Even as occurred in the case of the nut-gatherer. 



267 
Book Four 

Ibrahim's abdication. 

Once that noble Ibrahim, as he sat on his throne, 
Heard a clamour and noise of cries on the roof, 
Also heavy footsteps on the roof of his palace. 
He said to himself, "Whose heavy feet are those?" 
He shouted from his window, "Who goes there? 
'Tis no man's step; surely 'tis a fairy." 
His guards, filled with confusion, bowed their heads, 
Saying, "It is we who are going the rounds in search." 

1 2 

He said, "What seek ye?" They said "Our camels" 

He said, "Who ever searched for camels on a housetop?" 

They said, "We follow thy example, 

Who seekest union with God while sitting on a throne." 

This was all, and no man ever saw him again, 

Just as fairies are invisible to men. 

His substance was hid from men, though he was with 

them, 
For what can men see save the outward aspect and dress? 
As he was removed from the sight of friends and strangers, 
His fame was noised abroad like that of the Anka. 
For the soul of every bird that reaches Mount Qaf 
Confers glory on the whole family of birds. 

The anecdote of the nut-gatherer, introduced in the 
above story, is only another version of the story of the 



268 
The Masnavi 

thirsty man who threw bricks into the water in order to hear 
the sound of the splash. 14 This is followed by an address to 
Husamu-'d-Din, in which the poet says that his object in 
writing the Masnavi was to elicit words from Husam, as his 
words were the same as the words of God. 

Solomon's preaching to the people ofBilqis. 
The art of preaching. 

I tell the tale of Saba in lovers' style. 

When the breeze bore Solomon's words to that garden, 

'Twas as when bodies meet souls at the resurrection, 

Or as when boys return to their loved homes. 

The people of love are hidden amongst the peoples, 

As a liberal man encompassed by the contumely of the 

base. 
Souls are disgraced by union with bodies, 
Bodies are ennobled by union with souls. 
Arise, O lovers; this sweet draught is yours; 
Ye are they that endure; eternal life is yours. 
Ho! ye that seek, arise and take your fill of love, 
Snuff up that perfume of Yusufi 



Approach, O Solomon, thou that knowest birds' language, 
Sound the note of every bird that draws near; 
When God sent, thee to the birds, 



269 
Book Four 

He taught thee first the notes of all the birds. 

To the predestinarian bird talk predestination, 

To the bird with broken wings preach patience, 

To the patient well-doer preach comfort and pardon, 

To the spiritual 'Anka relate the glories of Mount Qaf, 

To the pigeon preach avoidance of the hawk, 

To the lordly hawk mercy and self-control; 

As for the bat, who lingers helpless in the dark, 

Acquaint him with the society of the light; 

To the fighting partridge teach peace, 

To the cock the signs of dawning day. 

In this way deal with all from the hoopoo to the eagle. 

Then follows a long account of various miraculous inci- 
dents that occurred during the childhood of the Prophet, 
how he was suckled by Halima, a woman of the Bani Sa'ad, 
how the idols bowed down before him, how he strayed from 
home, how his grandfather, Abd ul Muttalib, prayed to God 
that he might be found, and how he was at last found in the 
Ka'ba and restored to his grandfather. 

Next a story is told of a cur who attacked a blind man 
(Kur) in the street, rather than hunt the wild ass (Gor) on the 
mountains in company with well-bred dogs. This is an illus- 
tration of the thesis that mankind is prone to run after mean 
earthly objects, and to neglect aspiring to the spiritual world. 



270 
The Masnavi 

Solomon's admonitions to Bilqis. 

Ah! Bilqis, bestir thyself now the market is thronged, 

Flee away from them whose traffic is unprofitable! 

Arise, Bilqis, now that thou hast the choice, 

Before that death lays his heavy hand upon thee. 

Soon will death pull thy ears, as if thou wert 

A thief dragged before the officer in deadly fear. 

How long wilt thou steal shoes from asses of the world? 

If thou must steal, steal pearls of the world above. 

Thy sisters have found the kingdom that lasts forever, 

Thou cleavest to the kingdom of darkness. 

Happy is he who quits this earthly kingdom, 

Which sooner or later death will destroy. 

Arise! O Bilqis, at least behold 

The kingdom of the royal kings of the faith! 

In reality they are seated in the garden of the spirit, 

Though to outward view they are guiding their friends. 

That spiritual garden accompanies them everywhere, 

Yet it is never revealed to the eyes of the people, 

Its fruits ever asking to be gathered, 

Its fount of life welling up to be drunk! 

Go round about the heavens without aid of wings, 

Like sun or full moon or new moon! 

Thou wilt move as a spirit without aid of feet, 

Thou wilt eat sweet viands without mouth or palate. 



271 
Book Four 

No crocodile of sorrow will attack thy bark, 
Nor will sad thoughts of death assail thee. 
Thou wilt be at once queen, army, and throne, 
Endued with good fortune and fortune itself. 
Thou sayest thou art a great queen of good fortune; 
But thy fortune is apart from thee and will soon fade, 
Thou wilt be left like a, beggar without sustenance; 
Therefore, O chosen one, become thy own fortune. 
When, O spiritual one, thou hast become thy own for- 
tune, 
Then, being thyself thy fortune, thou wilt never lose it. 
How. O fortunate one, canst thou ever lose thyself, 
When thy real self is thy treasure and thy kingdom? 

How men and demons helped Solomon 
in building the temple. 

When Solomon laid the foundations of the temple, 
Men and Jinns came and lent their aid to the work, 
Some of them with good-will, and others on compulsion, 
Even as worshippers follow the road of devotion. 

Men are as demons, and lust of wealth their chain, 
Which drags them forth to toil in shop and field. 
This chain is made of their fears and anxieties. 
Deem not that these men have no chain upon them. 



272 
The Masnavi 

It causes them to engage in labor and the chase, 
It forces them to toil in mines and on the sea, 
It urges them towards good and towards evil. 
God saith, "On their necks is a rope of palm fibre," 
And "Verily on their necks have we placed ropes,' 
"We make this rope out of their own dispositions; 

There is none either impure or intelligent, 

20 

But we have fastened his work about his neck." 
Thy lust is even as fire burning in thy evil deeds; 
The black coal of these deeds is lighted by the fire; 
The blackness of the coal is first hidden by the fire, 
But, when it is burnt, the blackness is made visible. 



The building of the prophets was without lust, 
And accordingly its splendor ever increased. 
Yea, many are the noble temples they have raised, 
Though all were not named "The Most Remote Temple. 
The Ka'ba, whose renown waxes greater every moment, 
Owed its foundation to the piety of Abraham. 
Its glory is not derived from stones and mortar, 
But from being built without lust or strife. 
Neither are the prophets' writings like other writings; 
Nor their temples, nor their works, nor their families; 
Nor their manners, nor their wrath, nor their chastise- 
ments; 
Nor their dreams, nor their reason, nor their words. 



273 
Book Four 

Each one of them is endued with a different glory, 
Each soul's bird winged with different feathers. 

Ho! pious ones, build the lively temple of the heart, 
That the Divine Solomon may be seen, and peace be upon 

you! 
And if your demons and fairies be recalcitrant, 
Your good angels must place collars on their necks. 
If your demons go astray through guile and fraud, 
Chastisement must overtake them swift as lightning. 
Be like Solomon, so that your demons 
May dig stones for your spiritual edifice. 
Be like Solomon, free from evil thoughts and guile, 
So that carnal demons and Jinns may be submissive to 

you. 
Your heart is as Solomon's signet; take good care 
That it falls not a prey to demons, 
For then demons will rule over you as over Solomon. 
Guard then your signet from the demons, and be at peace. 

Then follows a story of a poet who recited a panegyric in 
honor of a liberal king. The king commanded that he 
should receive one thousand pieces of gold, but the vazir, 
named Abul-Hasan, gave him ten thousand. The poet went 
to his home well contented, but after some years fell into 
poverty, and naturally bethought him of the generous king 



274 
The Masnavi 

and his vazir, who had before assisted him. Sibawayh, the 
grammarian of Shiraz says "Allah" is derived from "Alah" 
(fleeing for refuge) and thus we see all creatures, and even 
the elements themselves, ever looking to Allah to sustain 
them in existence. The poet, therefore, again presented 
himself to the king with a new panegyric, and the king, on 
hearing it, commanded as before that a thousand pieces of 
gold should be given him. But the new vazir, who was also 
named Abul-Hasan, persuaded the king that the exchequer 
could not afford this large outlay, and kept the poet waiting 
so long for his money, that at last he was glad to get away 
with only one hundred pieces of gold. These two vazirs 
recall Asaf, the good vazir of King Solomon, who deserves 

.21 .  /- 

the title "Light upon light," and Haman, the evil vazir of 
Pharaoh, who turned his he, art against Moses, and brought 
many plagues upon the kingdom of Egypt. 

How all creatures cry to God for sustenance. 

Yea, all the fish in the seas, 

And all feathered fowl in the air above, 

All elephants, wolves, and lions of the forest, 

All dragons and snakes, and even little ants, 

Yea, even air, water, earth, and fire, 

Draw their sustenance from Him, both winter and sum- 



275 
Book Four 

Every moment this heaven cries to Him, saying, 
"O Lord, quit not Thy hold of me for a moment! 

The pillar of my being is Thy aid and protection; 

22 

The whole is folded up in that right hand of Thine." 
And earth cries, "O keep me fixed and steadfast, 
Thou who hast placed me on the top of waters!" 
All of them are waiting and expecting His aid, 
All have learned of Him to represent their needs. 

Every prophet extols this prescription, 

2^ 
"Seek ye help with patience and with prayer." 

Ho! seek aid of Him, not of another than Him 

Seek water in the ocean, not in a dried-up channel. 

The next anecdote is that of the raven who taught Cain 
the art of digging graves and burying corpses, as told in 
Koran v. 34. This is designed to illustrate the thesis that 
unaided human reason can discover no now truth, unless 
inspired by Divine wisdom, of which the prophets, and 
especially "Universal Reason," or the Prophet Muhammed, 
are the channels. Thus physicians and herbalists have 
derived their knowledge of the virtues of plants from the 
instructions originally given by King Solomon when he 
classified the plants that grew in the court of the temple. 
The inner eye sees more than is visible to the sight of the 
vulgar. To illustrate this, an anecdote is told of a Sufi who 
had accompanied his friends to a beautiful garden, but 



276 
The Masnavi 

instead of looking about and enjoying the fragrance of the 
flowers and fruits, sat with his head sunk on his breast in 
Sufi fashion. His friends said to him, in the words of the 
Koran, "Look at the signs of God's mercy, how after its 
death He quickeneth the earth!" He answered them that 
these signs were far more plainly visible to him in his heart 
than in the outward creation, which was merely as it were a 
blurred reflection from the spiritual creation enshrined in 
his heart. For God says, "The life of the world is naught but 

25 

a cheating fruition." In other words, "Nature conceals 
God, but the supernatural in man reveals Him." 

On cleansing the inward temple of the heart from 
self-conceit and reliance on carnal reason. 

When the body bows in worship, the heart is a temple, 
And where there is a temple, there bad friends are weeds 
When a liking for bad friends grows up in you, 
Flee from them, and avoid converse with them. 
Root up those weeds, for, if they attain full growth, 
They will subvert you and your temple together. 
O beloved, this weed is deviation from the "right way," 
You crawl crookedly, like infants unable to walk. 
Fear not to acknowledge your ignorance and guilt, 
That the Heavenly Master may not withhold instruction. 
When you say, "I am ignorant; O teach me," 
Such open confession is better than false pride. 



277 
Book Four 

O ingenuous one, learn of our father Adam, 

27 

Who said of yore, "O Lord, we have dealt unjustly." 
He made no vain excuses and prevaricated not, 
Nor did he raise the standard of guile and craft. 
On the other hand, Iblis raised arguments, saying, 
"I used to be honorable; Thou hast disgraced me. 
My stain is owing to Thee; Thou art my dyer; 
Thou hast caused my sin and transgression." 

Read the text, "Lord, Thou hast caused me to err," 
That you plead not compulsion, and so err (like Iblis). 
How long will you climb into that tree of compulsion? 
How long cast out of sight your own freewill? 
How long, like Iblis and his evil crew, 
Throw the blame of your own sins upon God? 
How were you compelled to sin when you took such plea- 
sure 
And pride in engaging in those sins? 
Does a man feel such pleasure in acting on compulsion 
As he exhibits when committing wrong actions? 
You battle like twenty men against those 
Who give you good advice not to do that act; 
Saying to them, "This is right and quite proper; 
Who dissuades me from it but men of no account?" 
Does a man acting on compulsion talk like this? 
Or rather one who is erring of his own freewill? 
Whatever your lust wills you deem freewill, 



278 
The Masnavi 

What reason demands you deem compulsion. 

Whoso is wise and prudent knows this, 

That cleverness comes from Iblis, but love from Adam. 

29 
Cleverness is like Canaan's swimming in the ocean; 

'Tis no river or small stream; 'tis the mighty ocean. 

Away with this attempt to swim; quit self-conceit. 

'Twill not save you; Canaan was drowned at last. 

Love is as the ark appointed for the righteous, 

Which annuls the danger and provides a way of escape. 

Sell your cleverness and buy bewilderment; 

Cleverness is mere opinion, bewilderment intuition. 

Make sacrifice of your reason at the feet of Mustafa, 

Say, "God Sufficeth me, for He, is sufficient for me." 

Do not, like Canaan, hang back from entering the ark, 

Being puffed up with vain conceit of cleverness. 

He said, "I will escape to the top of high mountains, 

Why need I put myself under obligation to Noah?" 

Ah! better for him had he never learnt swimming! 
Then he would have based his hopes on Noah's ark. 
Would he had been ignorant of craft as a babe! 
Then like a babe he would have clung to his mother. 
Would he had been less full of borrowed knowledge! 
Then he would have accepted inspired knowledge from his 

father. 
When, with inspiration at hand, you seek book-learning, 
Your heart, as if inspired, loads you with reproach. 



279 
Book Four 

Traditional knowledge, when inspiration is available, 

Is like making ablutions with sand when water is near. 

Make yourself ignorant, be submissive, and then 

You will obtain release from your ignorance. 

For this cause, O son, the Prince of men declared, 

"The majority of those in Paradise are the foolish." 

Cleverness is as a wind raising storms of pride; 

Be foolish, so that your heart may be at peace; 

Not with the folly that doubles itself by vain babble, 

But with that arising from bewilderment at "The Truth." 

Those Egyptian women who cut their hands were fools 

Fools as to their hands, being amazed at Yusuf's face. 

Make sacrifice of reason to love of "The Friend," 

True reason is to be found where He is. 

Men of wisdom direct their reason heavenwards, 

Vain babblers halt on earth where no "Friend" is. 

If through bewilderment your reason quits your head, 

Every hair of your head becomes true reason and a head. 

Then follow commentaries on the text, "O thou enfold- 
ed in thy mantle;" on the proverb, "Silence is the proper 
answer to a fool;" on the Hadis, "God created the angels 
with reason and the brutes with lust, but man he created 
with both reason and lust; the man who follows reason is 
higher than the angels, and the man who follows lust is 
lower than the brutes;" on the text, "As to those in whose 
heart is a disease, it will add doubt to their doubt, and they 



280 
The Masnavi 

shall die infidels," and a comparison of the struggle 
between reason and lust to that between Majnun and his 
she-camel, he trying to get to his mistress Laila, and the she- 
camel trying to run home to her foal. 

Notes: 

1. Koran xlix. 10; xxxi. 27; ii. 285. 

2. The letter is given in Koran xxvii. 30. 

3. All these legends are derived from Koran xxi., xxvii., and 
xxxviii. See Sale's notes. 

4. This refers to Muhammad, who is at once the "First reason" 
(Logos) and the "Perfect man," who is "the sum of all the 
worlds" and the "Great world." See Notices et Extraits des 
MSS., x. p. 86. 

5. He was also the final cause of creation. "If it had not been 
for thee, the world had not been created." 

6. Muhammad as the Logos is the channel by which divine 
grace is conveyed to man. The "change of the body" is an 
allusion to the ascension of Muhammad (Mi raj). 

7. AHadis. 

8. Music is much used in the religious services of the 
"Maulavi" order of Darveshes, founded by Jalalu -d-Din 
Rumi. See "The Dervishes," by J. P. Brown, p. 197. 

9. "Am not I your lord?" (Koran vii. 171). 

10. "When there shall be a trumpet blast, that shall be a dread- 
ful day" (Koran lxxiv. 7). 



281 
Book Four 

1 1. The so-called Pythagorean doctrine of the "Harmony of the 
spheres" was as well known to Persian poets as to 
Shakespeare. 

12. This is an allusion to the story of the "Believer's lost camel." 
Book ii., Story xi. 

13. This alludes to the well-known poem of Faridu-d-Din 'Attar 
the "Mantiqu-t-Tair." 

14. Book ii. Story v. 

15. Koran xxvii. 16. There is a Hadis, "Speak to men according 
to the amount of their intelligence." 

16. "These are they who have bought error at the price of guid- 
ance, but their traffic hath not been gainful" (Koran ii. 15). 

17. Union attained, all duality and separate phenomenal exis- 
tence are swallowed up in the One (Noumenon). (See 
Gulshan i Raz, I. 835 and 845). 

18. Koran iii. 5. 

19. Koran xxxvi. 7. 

20. "And every man's work have we fastened about his neck, and 
on the last day will we bring forth to him a book, which 
shall be shown to him wide open. Read thy book; there 
needeth none but thyself to make out an account against 
thee that day " (Koran xvii. 14). 

21. Koran xxiv. 35. 

22. Koran xxxix. 67. 

23. Koran ii. 148. 

24. Koran xxx. 49. 

25. Koran iii. 182. 



282 
The Masnavi 

26. "But is it unreasonable to confess that we believe in God, 
not by reason of the nature which conceals him, but by rea- 
son of the supernatural in man, which alone reveals him and 
proves him to exist? " (Jacobi, quoted in Sir W. Hamilton's 
Lectures on Metaphysics, vol. i. p. 40). 

27. Koran vii. 22. 

28. He said, "That thou hast caused me to err" (Koran vii. 15). 
This is the burden of many of 'Omar Khayyam's poems. 

29. Koran xi. 43. See Book iii., Story 5. 

30. Koran ix. 130. 

31. Knowledge of "The Truth" is to be attained not by exercise 
of the reason, but by illumination from above. When the 
light of "The Truth" is revealed, reason is drowned in bewil- 
derment. Gulshan i Raz, Answer ii. 

32. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, vol. ii. p. 898; 1 Cor. iv. 10. 

33. "They were amazed at Yusuf, and cut their hands, and said, 
'God keep us, this is no man!'" (Koran xii. 31). 

34. Koran lxxiii. 1 . 

35. Koran ix. 126. 



STORY III. The Youth who wrote a letter of 
complaint about his rations to the King. 

A certain youth in the service of a great king was dis- 
satisfied with his rations, so he went to the cook and 
reproached him with dishonoring his master by his stingi- 



283 
Book Four 

ness. The youth would not listen to his excuses, but wrote 
off an angry letter of complaint to the king, in terms of out- 
ward compliment and respect, but betraying an angry spir- 
it. On receiving this letter, the king observed that it con- 
tained only complaints about meat and drink, and evinced 
no aspirations after spiritual food, and therefore needed no 
answer, as "the proper answer to a fool is silence." When 
the youth received no answer to his letter, he was much sur- 
prised, and threw the blame on the cook and on the mes- 
senger, ignoring the fact that the folly of his own letter was 
the real reason of its being left unanswered. He wrote in all 
five letters, but the king persisted in his refusal to reply, say- 
ing that fools are enemies to God and man, and that he who 
has any dealings with a fool fouls his own nest. Fools only 
regard material meat and drink, whereas the food of the 
wise is the light of God, as it is said by the Prophet, "I pass 
the night in the presence of my Lord, who giveth me meat 
and drink," and again, "Fasting is the food of God," i.e., 
the means by which spiritual food is obtained. 

Explanation of the text "And Moses conceived a secret fear 
within him. We said 'Fear not, for thou shalt be 
uppermost (over Pharaoh's magicians). 

Moses said, "Their sorcery confuses them; 

What can I do? These people have no discernment." 

God said, "I will generate in them discernment; 



284 
The Masnavi 

I will make their undiscerning reason to see clearly. 
Although like a sea their waves cast up foam, 
O Moses, thou shalt prevail over them; fear not!" 
The magicians gloried in their own achievements, 
But when Moses' rod became a snake, they were con- 
founded. 

Whoso boasts of his beauty and wit, 

The stone of death is a touchstone of his boasts. 

Sorcery fades away, but the miracles of Moses advance. 

Both resemble a dish falling from a roof: 

The noise of the dish of sorcery leaves only cursing; 

The noise of the dish of faith leaves edification. 

When the touchstone is hidden from the sight of all, 

Then come forth to battle and boast, O base coin! 

Your time for boasting is when the touchstone is away; 

The hand of power will soon crush your exaltation. 

The base coin says to me with pride every moment, 

"O pure gold, how am I inferior to you?" 

The gold replies, "Even so, O comrade; 

But the touchstone is at hand; be ready to meet it!" 

Death of the body is a benefaction to the spiritual; 

What damage has pure gold to dread from the shears? 

If the base coin were of itself far-sighted, 

It would reveal at first the blackness it shows at last. 

If it had showed its blackness at first on its face, 



285 
Book Four 

'Twould have avoided hypocrisy now and misery at last. 
'Twould have sought the alchemy of grace in due time; 
Its reason would have prevailed over its hypocrisy. 
If it became broken-hearted through its own bad state, 
'Twould look onward to Him that heals the broken; 
'Twould look to the result and be broken-hearted 
And be made whole at once by the Healer of broken 

hearts. 
Divine grace places base copper in the alembic, 
Adulterated gold is excluded from that favor. 
O adulterated gold, boast not, but see clearly 
That thy Purchaser is not blind to thy defects. 
The light of the judgment-day will enlighten his eyes 
And destroy the glamour of thy fascinations. 
Behold them that have regard to the ultimate result, 
And also the regrets of foolish souls and their envy. 
Behold them that regard only the present, 
And cast away thoughts of evil to come from their minds. 

Notes: 

1. See Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, i. 551, for a parallel. 

2. Koran xxvi. 79. 

3. See Mishkat ul Masabih, vol. i. p. 463. 

4. Koran xx. 70. 



286 
The Masnavi 

STORY IV. Bayazid and his impious 
sayings when beside himself. 

The holy saint Bayazid before his death predicted the 
birth of the saint Abul-Hasan Khirqani, and specified all the 
peculiar qualities which would be seen in him. And after his 
death it came to pass as he had predicted, and Abul-Hasan, 
hearing what Bayazid had said, used to frequent his tomb. 
One day he visited the tomb as usual, and found it covered 
with snow, and a voice was heard saying, "The world is 
fleeting as snow. I am calling thee! Follow me and forsake 
the world!" 

How Bayazid cried out, when beside himself, "Glory be 

to me!" and how his disciples were scandalized at this 

saying, and how Bayazid answered them. 

Once that famous saint Bayazid came to his disciples, 

Saying, "Lo, I myself am God Almighty." 

That man of spiritual gifts being visibly beside himself; 

Said, "There is no God beside me; worship me!" 

Next morning, when his ecstatic state had passed, 

They said, "You said so and so, which was impious." 

He answered, "If I do so again, 

Straightway slay me with your knives! 

God is independent of me; I am in the body. 



287 
Book Four 

If I say that again you must kill me!" 

When that holy person had given this injunction, 

Each of his disciples made ready his knife. 

Again that overflowing cup became beside himself, 

And his recent injunctions passed from his mind. 

Alienation came upon him, reason went astray, 

The dawn shone forth and his lamp paled at its light. 

Reason is like an officer when the king appears; 
The officer then loses his power and hides himself. 
Reason is God's shadow; God is the sun. 
What power has the shadow before the sun? 
When a man is possessed by an evil spirit 
The qualities of humanity are lost in him. 
Whatever he says is really said by that spirit, 
Though it seems to proceed from the man's mouth. 
When the spirit has this rule and dominance over him, 
The agent is the property of the spirit, and not himself; 
His self is departed, and he has become the spirit. 
The Turk without instruction speaks Arabic; 
When he returns to himself he knows not a word of it. 
Seeing God is lord of spirits and of man, 
How can He be inferior in power to a spirit? 

When the eagle of alienation from self took wing, 
Bayazid began to utter similar speeches; 



288 
The Masnavi 

The torrent of madness bore away his reason, 

And he spoke more impiously than before. 

"Within my vesture is naught but God, 

Whether you seek Him on earth or in heaven." 

His disciples all became mad with horror, 

And struck with their knives at his holy body. 

Each one, like the assassins of Kardkoh, 

Without fear aimed at the body of his chief. 

Each who aimed at the body of the Shaikh, 

His stroke was reversed and wounded the striker. 

No stroke took effect on that man of spiritual gifts, 

But the disciples were wounded and drowned in blood. 

Each who had aimed a blow at his neck, 

Saw his own throat cut, and gave up the ghost; 

He who had struck at his breast 

Had cleft his own breast and killed himself. 

They who knew better that lord of felicity, 

Who had not courage enough to strike a deadly blow, 

Their half-knowledge held their hands back; 

They saved their lives but slightly wounded themselves. 

On the morrow those disciples, diminished in number, 

Raised lamentations in their houses. 

They went to Bayazid, thousands of men and women, 

Saying, "The two worlds are hidden in thy vesture; 

If this body of thine were that of a man, 

It would have perished of sword-wounds, like a man's." 



289 
Book Four 

The man in his senses fought with him 'beside himself, 
And thrust the thorn into his own eyes." 

Ah! you who smite with your sword him beside himself, 

You smite yourself therewith; Beware! 

For he that is beside himself is annihilated and safe; 

Yea, he dwells in security forever. 

His form is vanished, he is a mere mirror; 

Nothing is seen in him but the reflection of another. 

If you spit at it, you spit at your own face, 

And if you hit that mirror, you hit yourself; 

And if you see an ugly face in it, 'tis your own, 

And if you see an 'Isa there, you are its mother Mary. 

He is neither this nor that he is void of form; 

'Tis your own form which is reflected back to you. 

But when the discourse reaches this point, lip is closed; 
When pen reaches this point, it is split in twain. 
Close then your lips, though eloquence be possible. 
Keep silence; God knows the right way! 

This is followed by an anecdote of the Prophet appoint- 
ing an Hudhaili youth to be captain of a band of warriors 
amongst whom were many older and more experienced sol- 
diers, and of the objections made to this appointment, and 
of the Prophet's answer to the objectors. 



290 
The Masnavi 

Why the Prophet promoted the youth to command his seni 

The Prophet said, "O ye who regard only the outside, 
Regard him not as a youth void of talents. 
Many are they whose beards are black yet are old, 
Many too have white beards and hearts like pitch. 
I have made trial of his wisdom often and often, 
And that youth has shown himself old in his actions. 
Age consists in maturity of wisdom, O son, 
Not, in whiteness of the beard and hair. 
How can any one be older than Iblis? 
Yet, if he has no wisdom, he is naught. 
Suppose him an infant, if he has 'Isa's soul, 
He is pure from pride and from carnal lust. 
That whiteness of the hair is a sign of maturity 
Only to purblind eyes whose vision is limited. 
Since that shortsighted one judges by outward signs, 
He seeks the right course by outward tokens. 
For his sake I said that if ye desire counsel 
Ye ought to make choice of an old man. 
He who has emerged from the veil of blind belief 
Beholds by the light of God all things that exist. 
His pure light, without signs or tokens, 
Cleaves for him the rind and brings him to the kernel. 
To the regarder of externals, genuine and base coin are 
alike. 



291 
Book Four 

How can he know what is inside the basket? 
Many are the gold coins made black with smoke, 
So that they elude the clutches of greedy thieves; 
Many are the copper coins gilded with gold, 
And sold as gold to men of slender wits. 
We who regard the inside of the world, 
We look at the heart and disregard the outside. 
The judges who confine their view to externals 
And base their decisions on outward appearances, 
As they testify and make outward show of faith, 
Are straightway dubbed faithful by men of externals. 
Therefore these heretics, who regard only externals, 
Have secretly shed the blood of many true believers. 
Strive then to be old in wisdom and in faith, 
That, like Universal Reason, you may see within." 

Notes: 

1. Alluding to the story of the Kurd, Syad Abul-Wafa, Book i 
Story xiv. note. 

2. A hill in Mazandaran. 

3. "And some there are who say, 'We believe in God and in the 
last day,' yet they are not believers" (Koran ii. 7). 

4. Universal Reason, here applied to Muhammad. "The first 
thing which God created was (aql) Reason or Intelligence," 
i.e., the Logos. 



292 
The Masnavi 

STORY V. The Three Fishes. 

This story, which is taken from the book of Kalila and 
Damnah, is as follows. There was in a secluded place a lake, 
which was fed by a running stream, and in this lake were 
three fishes, one very wise, the second half wise, and the third 
foolish. One day some fishermen passed by that lake, and 
having espied the fish, hastened home to fetch their nets. The 
fish also saw the fishermen and were sorely disquieted. The 
very wise fish, without a minute's delay, quitted the lake and 
took refuge in the running stream which communicated with 
it, and thus escaped the impending danger. The half wise fish 
delayed doing anything till the fishermen actually made their 
appearance with their nets. He then floated upon the surface 
of the water, pretending to be dead, and the fisherman took 
him up and threw him into the stream, and by this device he 
saved his life. But the foolish fish did nothing but swim wild- 
ly about, and was taken and killed by the fishermen. 

The marks of the wise man, of the half wise, and of the fool. 

The wise man is he who possesses a torch of his own; 

He is the guide and leader of the caravan. 

That leader is his own director and light; 

That illuminated one follows his own lead. 

He is his own protector; do ye also seek protection 

From that light whereon his soul is nurtured. 



293 
Book Four 

The second, he, namely, who is half wise, 

Knows the wise man to be the light of his eyes. 

He clings to the wise man like a blind man to his guide, 

So as to become possessed of the wise man's sight. 

But the fool, who has no particle of wisdom, 

Has no wisdom of his own, and quits the wise man. 

He knows nothing of the way, great or small, 

And is ashamed to follow the footsteps of the guide. 

He wanders into the boundless desert, 

Sometimes halting and despairing, sometimes running. 

He has no lamp wherewith to light himself on his way, 

Nor half a lamp which might recognize and seek light. 

He lacks wisdom, so as to boast of being alive, 

And also half wisdom, so as to assume to be dead? 

That half wise one became as one utterly dead 

In order to rise up out of his degradation. 

If you lack perfect wisdom, make yourself as dead 

Under the shadow of the wise, whose words give life. 

The fool is neither alive so as to companion with 'Isa, 

Nor yet dead so as to feel the power of 'Isa's breath. 

His blind soul wanders in every direction, 

And at last makes a spring, but springs not upwards. 

The counsels of the bird. 

A man captured a bird by wiles and snares; 
The bird said to him, "O noble sir, 



294 
The Masnavi 

In your time you have eaten many oxen and sheep, 

And likewise sacrificed many camels; 

You have never become satisfied with their meat, 

So you will not be satisfied with my flesh. 

Let me go, that I may give you three counsels, 

Whence you will see whether I am wise or foolish. 

The first of my counsels shall be given on your wrist, 

The second on your well-plastered roof, 

And the third I will give you from the top of a tree. 

On hearing all three you will deem yourself happy. 

As regards the counsel on your wrist, 'tis this. 

'Believe not foolish assertions of any one!'" 

When he had spoken this counsel on his wrist, he flew 

Up to the top of the roof, entirely free. 

Then he said, "Do not grieve for what is past; 

When a thing is done, vex not yourself about it." 

He continued, "Hidden inside this body of mine 

Is a precious pearl, ten drachms in weight. 

That jewel of right, belonged to you, 

Wealth for yourself and prosperity for your children. 

You have lost it, as it, was not fated you should get it, 

That pearl whose like can nowhere be found." 

Thereupon the man, like a woman in her travail, 

Gave vent to lamentations and weeping. 

The bird said to him, "Did I not counsel you, saying, 

'Beware of grieving over what is past and gone?' 



295 
Book Four 

When 'tis past and gone, why sorrow for it? 

Either you understood not my counsel or are deaf. 

The second counsel I gave you was this, namely, 

'Be not misguided enough to believe foolish assertions.' 

O fool, altogether I do not weigh three drachms, 

How can a pearl of ten drachms be within me?" 

The man recovered himself and said, "Well then, 

Tell me now your third good counsel!" 

The bird replied, "You have made a fine use of the others, 

That I should waste my third counsel upon you. 

To give counsel to a sleepy ignoramus 

Is to sow seeds upon salt land. 

Torn garments of folly and ignorance cannot be patched. 

O counselors, waste not the seed of counsel on them!" 

Notes: 

1. Anvar i Suhaili. Book i. Story 15. 

STORY VI. Moses and Pharaoh. ! 

Then follows a very long account of the dealings of Moses, 
an incarnation of true reason, with Pharaoh, the exponent of 
mere opinion or illusion. It begins with a long discussion 
between Moses and Pharaoh. Moses tells Pharaoh that both 



296 
The Masnavi 

of them alike owe their bodies to earth and their souls to 
God, and that God is their only lord. Pharaoh replies that he 
is lord of Moses, and chides Moses for his want of gratitude 
to himself for nurturing him in his childhood. Moses replies 
that he recognizes no lord but God, and reminds Pharaoh 
how he had tried to kill him in his infancy. Pharaoh com- 
plains that he is made of no account by Moses, and Moses 
retorts that in order to cultivate a waste field it is necessary 
to break up the soil; and in order to make a good garment, 
the stuff must first be cut up; and in order to make bread, 
the wheat must first be ground in the mill, and so on. The 
best return he can make to Pharaoh for his hospitality to him 
in his infancy is to set him free from his lust-engendered illu- 
sions, like a fish from the fish-hook which has caught him. 
Pharaoh then twits Moses with his sorceries in changing his 
staff into a serpent, and thereby beguiling the people. Moses 
replies that all this was accomplished not by sorcery, like that 
of Pharaoh's own magicians, but by the power of God, 
though Pharaoh could not see it, owing to his want of per- 
ception of divine things. The ear and the nose cannot see 
beautiful objects, but only the eye, and similarly the sensual 
eye, blinded by lust, is impotent to behold spiritual truth. 
On the other hand, men of spiritual insight, whose vision is 
purged from lust, become as it were all eyes, and no longer 
see double, but only the One sole real Being. Man's body, it 
is true, is formed of earth, but by discipline and contrition it 



297 
Book Four 

may be made to reflect spiritual verities, even as coarse and 
hard iron may be polished into a steel mirror. Pharaoh ought 
to cleanse the rust of evil-doing from his soul, and then he 
would be able to see the spiritual truths which Moses was 
displaying before him. The door of repentance is always 
open. Moses then promised that if Pharaoh would obey one 
admonition he should receive in return four advantages. 
Pharaoh was tempted by this promise, and asked what the 
admonition was. Moses answered that it was this, that 
Pharaoh should confess that there is no God except the One 
Creator of all things in heaven and on earth. Pharaoh then 
prayed him to expound the four advantages he had 
promised, saying that possibly they might cure him of 
infidelity, and cause him to become a vessel of mercy, instead 
of one of wrath. Moses then explained that they were as fol- 
lows:  (1) Health. (2) Long life, ending in the conviction 
that death is gain. Even as one who knows of a treasure hid 
in a ruined house pulls down the house to find that treasure, 
so does the wise man, full of years and experience, pull down 
the house of the body to gain the treasure of eternal life. The 
tradition "I was a hidden treasure," bears on this matter. (3) 
A better kingdom than that of Egypt, one of peace in place 
of one of enmity and contention. (4) Perpetual youth. 

Pharaoh then proceeded to take counsel with his wife, 
Asiya, whether it would be advisable to quit his infidelity 



298 
The Masnavi 

and believe in the promises of Moses. Asiya, being a pious 
woman and well inclined to Moses, whom she had nurtured 
in his infancy, urged him to do so, but Pharaoh said he 
would first consult his vazir Haman. Asiya had a bad opin- 
ion of Haman, whom she knew to be as blind to spiritual 
truths as Pharaoh himself, and she did her best to dissuade 
Pharaoh from consulting him. To illustrate Haman's spiri- 
tual blindness, she told the story of a royal falcon who fell 
into the hands of an ignorant old woman. This old woman 
knew nothing of the virtues of a falcon, and was displeased 
at the falcon's appearance, and said to it, "What was your 
mother about to leave your claws and beak so long?" She 
then proceeded to trim them short, according to her fancy, 
and of course spoiled the falcon for all purposes of falconry. 
Pharaoh, however, would not be diverted from his purpose 
of consulting Haman, and Asiya was fain to console herself 
with the reflection that like always herds with like, and so 
Pharaoh must needs consort with Haman, who was in so 
many respects a duplicate of himself. To illustrate this she 
recalled the story of a woman whose infant had crawled to 
the brink of a canal, where it persisted in remaining, at the 
imminent peril of its life, despite all her calls and entreaties. 
In her distress she asked aid of Ali, who told her to place 
another infant on the top of the bank. She did so, and her 
own infant, seeing its playfellow, left the brink of its own 
accord and came to join its fellow. The spirit of man is of 
like genus with the holy prophets, but man's animal lust 



299 
Book Four 

with the demons. And as things of like nature attract one 
another, so unlike things repel one another. Thus it is said 
that when holy men pray to be delivered from hell, hell also 
prays that they may be kept away from it. Pharaoh then 
proceeded to consult Haman, and Haman, on hearing that 
Moses had proposed to Pharaoh to humble himself and 
confess the supreme lordship of God, was indignant and 
rent his clothes, saying, "Is not the kingdom of Egypt thine? 
Art thou not mightier than this despicable fellow? Who is 
he to degrade Pharaoh from his 'supreme lordship?'" So 
Pharaoh listened to Haman and refused to be converted to 
the true faith. Then Moses was much discouraged, but he 
was consoled by a voice from heaven assuring him that he 
was well-beloved of God, because in spite of disappoint- 
ments and through good and evil he clung to God. 

On the tradition, "I was a hidden treasure and I desired to be 
known, and I created the world in order to be known". 

Destroy your house, and with the treasure hidden in it 

You will be able to build thousands of houses. 

The treasure lies under it; there is no help for it; 

Hesitate not to pull it down; do not tarry! 

For with the coin of that treasure 

A thousand houses can be built without labor. 

At last of a surety that house will be destroyed, 

And the divine treasure will be seen beneath it. 



300 
The Masnavi 

But 'twill not belong to you, because in truth 

That prize is the wages for destroying the house. 

When one has not done the work he gets no wages; 

"Man gets nothing he has not worked for." 

Then you will bite your finger, saying, "Alas! 

That bright moon was hidden under a cloud. 

I did not do what they told me for my good; 

Now house and treasure are lost and my hand is empty.' 

You have taken your house on lease or hired it; 

'Tis not your own property to buy and sell. 

As to the term of the lease, it is till your death; 

In that term you have to turn it to use. 

If before the end of the term of the lease 

You omit to derive profit from the house, 

Then the owner puts you out of it, 

And pulls it down himself to find the gold-mine. 

While you are now smiting your head in deep regret, 

And now tearing your beard to think of your folly, 

Saying, "Alas! that house belonged to me; 

I was blind and did not derive profit from it. 

Alas! the wind has carried off my dwelling 

Forever! 'O misery that rests on slaves!' 

In that house of mine I saw but forms and pictures; 

I was enchanted with that house so fleetin! 

I was ignorant of the treasure hidden beneath it, 

Otherwise I would have grasped an axe as a perfume. 

Ah! if I had administered the justice of the axe, 



301 
Book Four 

I should now have been quit of sorrow. 

But I fixed my gaze on outward forms, 

Like an infant I sported with playthings. 

Well said the famous Hakim Sanai, 

'Thou art a child; thy house is full of pictures.' 

In his divine poem he gives this advice, 

'Sweep away the dust from thy house!'" 

They who recognize the almighty power of God 
do not ask where heaven is or where hell is. 

"O Pharaoh, if you are wise, I show you mercy; 

But if you are an ass, I give you the stick as an ass. 

So I will drive you out of your stable, 

Even as I make your head and ears bleed with my stick. 

In this stable asses and men alike 

Are deprived of peace by your oppressions. 

See! I have brought a staff for the purpose of correcting 

Every ass who does not prove tractable. 

It turns into a serpent in vengeance against you, 

Because you have become a serpent in deed and character. 

You are an evil serpent, swelled to the size of a hill. 

Yet look at the Serpent (constellation) in heaven. 

This staff is a foretaste to you of hell, 

Saying, 'Ho, take refuge in the light! 

Otherwise you will fall into my jaws, 

And will find no escape from my clutches!' 



302 
The Masnavi 

This staff even now became a serpent, 

So that you need not ask, 'Where is God's hell?' 

God makes a hell wheresover He wills; 

He makes the very sky a snare and trap for birds. 

He produces pains and aches in your teeth, 

So that you say, "Tis a hell and serpent's bite.' 

Or again He makes your spittle as honey, 

So that you say, "Tis heaven and wine of Paradise.' 

He makes sugar to grow in your mouth, 

That you may know the might of the divine decrees. 

Therefore, bite not the innocent with your teeth; 

Bear in mind the divine stroke that tarries not." 

God made the Nile blood to the Egyptians, 

He preserved the Israelites from the peril, 

That you might know how God discerns 

Between the wise and the foolish wayfarers. 

The Nile learned of God discernment 

When it let the ones through and engulphed the others. 

God's mercy made the Nile wise, 

His wrath made Cain foolish. 

Of His mercy He created wisdom in inanimate things, 

And of His wrath He deprived the wise of wisdom. 

Of His mercy wisdom accrued to inanimate things, 

As a chastisement He took wisdom from the wise. 

Here at His command wisdom was shed down like 



303 
Book Four 

Whilst there wisdom saw His wrath and fled away. 

Clouds and sun, and moon and lofty stars, 

All come and go in obedience to His ordinance; 

No one of them comes save at His appointed time; 

It lingers not behind nor anticipates that time. 

Whereas you understood not this secret, the prophets 

Have instilled this knowledge into stone and staff; 

So that you may infer that other inanimate things 

Without doubt resemble in this stones and staves. 

The obedience of stone and staff is shown to you, 

And informs you of that of other inanimate things. 

They cry, "We are all aware of God and obey Him; 

We are not destructive by mere fortuitous chance." 

Thus you know the water of the Nile when in flood 

Made distinction between the Egyptians and the Israelites. 

You know the others are wise as earth, who, when cleft, 

Knew Qarun and swallowed him up in vengeance. 

Or like the moon, who heard the command and hasted 

To sever itself into two halves in the sky. 

Or like the trees and stones, which in all places 

Were seen to bow down at the feet of Mustafa. 

The arguments between a Sunni and a Materialist 
(Dahri) decided by the arbitrament of fire. 

Last night a Sunni said, "The world is transitory; 
The heavens will pass away; 'God will be the heir.'" 



304 
The Masnavi 

A philosopher replied, "How know you they are transitory? 

How knows the rain the transitory nature of the cloud? 

Are you not a mere mote floating in the sunbeams? 

How know you that the sun is transitory? 

A mere worm buried in a dung-heap, 

How can it know the origin and end of the earth? 

In blind belief you have accepted this from your father, 

And through folly have clung to it ever since. 

Tell me what is the proof of its transitoriness, 

Or else be silent and indulge not in idle talk." 

The Sunni said, "One day I saw two persons 

Engaged in argument on this deep question, 

Yea, in dispute and controversy and argument. 

At last a crowd was gathered round them. 

I proceeded towards that company 

To inform myself of the subject of their discourse. 

One said, 'This sky will pass away; 

Doubtless this building had a builder.' 

The other said, 'It is eternal and without period; 

It had no builder, or it was its own builder.' 

The first said, 'Do you then deny the Creator, 

The Bringer of day and night, the Sustainer of men?' 

He answered, 'Without proof I will not listen 

To what you say; 'tis only based on blind belief. 

Go! bring proof and evidence, for never 

Will I accept this statement without proof 



305 
Book Four 

He answered, 'The proof is within my heart, 

Yea, my proofs are hidden in my heart. 

From weakness of vision you see not the new moon; 

If I see it, be not angry with me!' 

Much talk followed, and the people were perplexed 

About the origin and end of the revolving heavens. 

Then the first said, 'O friend, within me is a proof 

Which assures me of the transitoriness of the heavens. 

I hold it for certain, and the sign of certainty 

In him who possesses it is entering into fire. 

Know this proof is not to be expressed in speech, 

Any more than the feeling of love felt by lovers. 

The secret I labor to express is not revealed 

Save by the pallor and emaciation of my face. 

When the tears course down my cheeks, 

They are a proof of the beauty and grace of my beloved.' 

The other said, "I take not these for a proof, 

Though they may be a proof to common people." 

The Sunni said, "When genuine and base coin boast, 

Saying, 'Thou art false, I am good and genuine,' 

Fire is the test ultimately, 

When the two rivals are cast into the furnace." 

Accordingly both of them entered the furnace, 

Both leapt into the fiery flame; 

And the philosopher was burnt to ashes, 

But the God-fearing Sunni was made fairer than before. 



306 
The Masnavi 

Notes: 

1 . This story is an expansion of Koran xliii. 50 and following 
verses, and of Koran xi. 

2. See Koran xliii. 50. 

3. Compare the Hadis, "Die before you die," i.e., mortify your 
carnal desires, and you will find spiritual treasure. 

4. The Turkish commentator translates ruh by Haqq Yoluna, 
"for the sake of truth," "in the way of truth." The Lucknow 
commentator, as usual, shirks the difficulty. 

5. Koran liii. 40. 

6. Koran xxxvi, 29. 

7. Koran liv. 1. 

8. Ghazzali divides the ancient Greek philosophers into three 
classes: Dahriyun, Tabayiun, and Ilahiyun. Schmolders, 
Ecoles Philosophiques, p. 29. 

9. Koran xv. 23. 



STORY VII. The Courtier who quarreled 
with his Friend for saving his Life. 

A king was enraged against one of his courtiers, and drew 
his sword to slay him. The bystanders were all afraid to 
interfere, with the exception of one who boldly threw him- 
self at the king's feet and begged him to spare the offender. 



307 
Book Four 

The king at once stayed his hand, and laid down his sword, 
saying, "As you have interceded for him, I would gladly par- 
don him, even if he had acted as a very demon. I cannot 
refuse your entreaties, because they are the same as my own. 
In reality, it is not you who make these entreaties for him, 
but I who make them through your mouth. I am the real 
actor in this matter and you are only my agent. Remember 
the text, 'You shot not when you shot;' you are, as it were, 
the foam, and I the mighty ocean beneath it. The mercy you 
show to this offender is really shown by me, the king." The 
offender was accordingly released and went his way; but, 
strange to say, he showed no gratitude to his protector, but, 
on the contrary, omitted to greet him when he met him, 
and in other ways refused to recognize the favor he had 
received from him. This behavior excited remark, and peo- 
ple questioned him as to the cause of his ingratitude to his 
benefactor. He replied, "I had offered up my life to the king 
when this man intervened. It was a moment when, accord- 
ing to the tradition, 'I was with God in such a manner that 
neither prophet nor angel found entrance along with me,' 
and this man intruded between us. I desired no mercy save 
the king's blows; I sought no shelter save the king. If the 
king had cut off my head he would have given me eternal 
life in return for it. My duty is to sacrifice my life; it is the 
king's prerogative to give life. The night which is made dark 
as pitch by the king scorns the brightness of the brightest 



308 
The Masnavi 

festal day. He who beholds the king is exalted above all 
thoughts of mercy and vengeance. Of a man raised to this 
exalted state no description is possible in this world, for he 
is hidden in God, and words like 'mercy' and Vengeance' 
only express men's partial and weak views of the matter. It 
is true 'God taught Adam the names of all things,' but that 
means the real qualities of things, and not such names as 
ordinary men use, clad in the dress of human speech. The 
words and expressions we use have merely a relative truth, 
and do not unfold absolute truth." 

He illustrates this by the reply made to the angel Gabriel 
by Abraham when he was cast into the fire by Nimrod. 
Gabriel asked him if he could assist him, and Abraham 
answered, "No! I have no need of your help." When one has 
attained union with God he has no need of intermediaries. 
Prophets and apostles are needed as links to connect ordi- 
nary men with God, but he who hears the "inner voice" 
within him has no need to listen to outward words, even of 
apostles. Although that intercessor is himself dwelling in 
God, yet my state is higher and more lovely than his. 
Though he is God's agent, yet I desire not his intercession 
to save me from evil sent me by God, for evil at God's hand 
seems to me good. What seems mercy and kindness to the 
vulgar seems wrath and vengeance to God-intoxicated 
saints. God's severity and chastisements serve to exalt his 



309 
Book Four 

saints, though they make the vulgar more ungodly than 
before, even as the water of the Nile was pure water to the 
Israelites, but blood to the Egyptians. 

Moses asks the Almighty, "Why hast 
Thou made men to destroy them?" 

Moses said, "O Lord of the day of account, 

Thou makest forms; wherefore, then, destroyest Thou 

them? 
Thou makest charming forms, both men and women; 
Wherefore, then, dost Thou lay them waste?" 
God answered, "I know that this query of thine 
Proceeds not from negation or vain curiosity. 
Otherwise I should chastise and punish thee; 
Yea, I should rebuke thee for this question. 
But thou seekest to discover in my actions 
The ruling principle and the eternal mystery, 
In order to inform the people thereof, 
And to make 'ripe' every 'raw' person. 
Yea, O messenger, thou questionest me that I may reveal 
My ways to the people, though thou knowest them. 

O Moses, go and sow seed in the ground 

In order to do justice to this question." 

When Moses had sowed and his seed had grown up, 



310 
The Masnavi 

He took a sickle and reaped the corn, 

And then a divine voice reached his ears: 

"Why hast thou sown and nurtured the corn, 

And then cut it down directly it was ripe?" 

Moses replied, "Lord, I cut it and lay it low 

Because here I have grain and straw. 

Grain is out of place in the straw-yard, 

And straw is useless in the wheat-barn. 

'Tis wrong to mix these two, 

It is needful to sift them one from the other." 

God said, "From whom learnest thou this knowledge 

Whereby thou hast constructed a threshing-floor?" 

Moses said, "O Lord, Thou hast given me discernment." 

God said, "Then have not I also discernment? 

Amongst my creatures there are pure spirits, 

And also dark and befouled spirits. 

The oyster-shells are not all of the same value; 

Some contain pearls, and others black stones. 

It is needful to discern the bad from the good, 

Just as much as to sift wheat from straw. 

The people of this world exist in order to manifest 

And to disclose the 'hidden treasure.' 

Read, 'I was a hidden treasure, and desired to be known; 

Hide not the hidden treasure, but disclose it. 

Your true treasure is hidden under a false one, 

Just as butter is hidden within the substance of milk. 



311 
Book Four 

The false one is this transitory body of yours, 

The true one your divine soul. 

Long time this milk is exposed to view, 

And the soul's butter is hidden and of no account. 

Stir up your milk assiduously with knowledge, 
So that what is hidden in it may be disclosed; 
Because this mortal is the guide to immortality, 
As the cries of revellers indicate the cup-bearer." 

Notes: 

1. Koran viii. 17. 

2. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 120. 

3. Koran ii. 29. 

4. See Koran xxi. 68, and the Commentators thereon. 

5. So Job x. 8: " Thy hands have made me, yet Thou dost 
destroy me." 



STORY VIII. The Prince who, after having been beguiled 
by a Courtesan, returned to his True Love. 

A certain king dreamed that his dearly beloved son, a 
youth of great promise, had come to an untimely end. On 
awaking he was rejoiced to find that his son was still alive; 



312 
The Masnavi 

but he reflected that an accident might carry him off at any 
moment, and therefore decided to marry him without 
delay, in order that the succession might be secured. 
Accordingly he chose the daughter of a pious Darvesh as a 
bride for his son, and made preparations for the wedding. 
But his wife and the other ladies of his harem did not 
approve of the match, considering it below the dignity of 
the prince to marry the daughter of a beggar. The king 
rebuked them, saying that a Darvesh who had renounced 
worldly wealth for the sake of God was not to be con- 
founded with an ordinary beggar, and insisted on the con- 
summation of the marriage. After the marriage the prince 
refused to have anything to do with his bride, though she 
was very fair to look on, and he carried on an intrigue with 
an ugly old woman who had bewitched him by sorcery. 
After a year, however, the king found some physicians who 
succeeded in breaking the spell, and the prince returned to 
his senses, and his eyes were opened to the superior attrac- 
tions of his wife, and he renounced his ugly paramour and 
fell in love with his wife. This is a parable, the true wife 
being the Deity, the old paramour the world, and the physi- 
cians the prophets and saints. Another illustration is a child 
who played at besieging a mimic fort with his fellows, and 
succeeded in capturing it and keeping the others out. At 
this moment God "bestowed on him wisdom, though a 
child," and it became to him a day "when a man flees from 



313 
Book Four 



2 

his brethren," and he recognized the emptiness of this idle 
sport, and engaged in the pursuit of holiness and piety. This 
is followed by an anecdote of a devotee who had so concen- 
trated his thoughts on things above that he was utterly care- 
less of all earthly troubles, and was cheerful and rejoicing 
even in the midst of a severe famine. 

The world is the outward form of "Universal Reason" 

(Muhammad), and he who grieves him must 

expect trouble in the world. 

The whole world is the outward form of Universal Reason, 

For it is the father of all creatures of reason. 

When a man acts basely towards Universal Reason, 

Its form, the world, shows its teeth at him. 

Be loyal to this father and renounce disobedience, 

That this earthy house may furnish you golden carpets. 

Then the judgment-day will be the "cash of your state," 

Earth and heavens will be transfigured before you. 

I am ever in concord with this father of ours, 

And earth ever appears to me as a Paradise. 

Each moment a flesh form, a new beauty, 

So that weariness vanishes at these ever-fresh sights. 

I see the world filled with blessings, 

Fresh waters ever welling up from new fountains. 

The sound of those waters reaches my ears, 



314 
The Masnavi 

My brain and senses are intoxicated therewith. 
Branches of trees dancing like fair damsels, 
Leaves clapping hands like singers. 
These glories are a mirror shining through a veil; 
If the mirror were unveiled, how would it be? 
I tell not one in a thousand of them, 
Because every ear is stopped with doubt. 
To men of illusions these tales are mere good tidings, 
But men of knowledge deem them not tidings, but ready 
cash. 

This is illustrated by an anecdote of Ezra or 'Uzair and his 
sons. On his return from Babylon, whither he had been 
carried captive by Nebuchadnezzar, Ezra beheld the ruins of 
Jerusalem, and he said, "How shall God give life to this city 
after it hath been dead?" And God caused him to die for a 
hundred years, and then raised him again to life, and said to 
him, "How long hast thou waited?" He said, "I have waited 
a day." God said, "Nay, thou hast waited a hundred years. 
Look at the dead bones of thine ass; we will raise them and 
clothe them with flesh." Ezra was raised from the dead as a 
young man, whereas his sons were then, of course, very old 
men. They met him, and asked if he had seen their father. 
He replied, "I have seen him; he is coming." Some of them 
rejoiced, considering this good news; but others, who had 
loved him more dearly, knew him and fainted with joy. 



315 
Book Four 

What was mere good tidings to the men of opinion was the 
"ready money of their state" to men of real knowledge. 

Notes: 

1. Koran xix. 13. 

2. Koran lxxx. 34. 

3. "Aql i Kull, Universal Reason, or the Logos, was identified 
with the prophet Muhammad." 

4. Koran xiv. 49. 

5. This story comes from Koran ii. 261. 



STORY IX. The Mule and the Camel. 

A mule said to a camel, "How is it that I am always stum- 
bling and falling down, whilst you never make a false step?" 
The camel replied, "My eyes are always directed upwards, 
and I see a long way before me, while your eyes look down, 
and you only see what is immediately under your feet." The 
mule admitted the truth of the camel's statement, and 
besought him to act as his guide in future, and the camel 
consented to do so. Just so partial reason cannot see beyond 
the grave, but real reason looks onward to the day of judg- 
ment, and, therefore, is enabled to steer a better course in 
this world. For this cause, men having only partial reason or 



316 
The Masnavi 

mere opinion of their own ought to follow the guidance of 
the saints, according to the text, "O believers, enter not 
upon any affair ere God and his Apostle lead the way." 

Then follows another anecdote of an Egyptian who asked 
an Israelite to draw water for him from the Nile, because the 
water of the Nile turned to blood when drawn by an 
Egyptian. Afterwards the Egyptian asked the Israelite to 
pray for him, and the Israelite admonished him to renounce 
his egotism and conceit of his own existence, which blind- 
ed his eyes to divine verities. In illustration of this he tells 
the same story of an adulterous woman, which is known as 
the "Merchant's Tale" in Chaucer. This woman, desiring to 
carry on an intrigue with her paramour, climbed up a pear- 
tree to gather the fruit, and when she had reached the top 
she looked down, and pretended that she saw her husband 
misconducting himself with another woman. The husband 
assured her there was no one but himself there, and desired 
her to come down and see for herself. She came down and 
admitted there was no one there. Her husband then, at her 
request, ascended the tree, and she at once called her para- 
mour, and began to amuse herself with him. Her husband 
saw her from his post in the tree, and began to abuse her; 
but she declared there was no man with her, and that the 
pear-tree made her husband see double, just as it had made 
her see double previously. 



317 
Book Four 

The evolution of man. 



2 



First he appeared in the class of inorganic things, 
Next he passed therefrom into that of plants. 
For years he lived as one of the plants, 
Remembering naught of his inorganic state so different; 
And when he passed from the vegetive to the animal state 
He had no remembrance of his state as a plant, 
Except the inclination he felt to the world of plants, 
Especially at the time of spring and sweet flowers. 
Like the inclination of infants towards their mothers, 
Which know not the cause of their inclination to the 

breast, 
Or the excessive inclination of young disciples 
Towards their noble and illustrious teachers. 
The disciple's partial reason comes from that Reason, 
The disciple's shadow is from that bough. 
When the shadows in the disciples cease, 
They know the reason of their attachment to the teachers. 
For, O fortunate one, how can the shadow move, 
Unless the tree that casts the shadow move as well? 
Again, the great Creator, as you know, 
Drew man out of the animal into the human state. 
Thus man passed from one order of nature to another, 
Till he became wise and knowing and strong as he is now. 
Of his first souls he has now no remembrance, 



318 
The Masnavi 

And he will be again changed from his present soul. 
In order to escape from his present soul full of lusts 
He must behold thousands of reasonable souls. 

Though man fell asleep and forgot his previous states, 
Yet God will not leave him in this self-forgetfulness; 
And then he will laugh at his own former state 
Saying, " What mattered my experiences when asleep? 
When I had forgotten my prosperous condition, 
And knew not that the grief and ills I experienced 
Were the effect of sleep and illusion and fancy? 
In like manner this world, which is only a dream. 
Seems to the sleeper as a thing enduring for ever 
But when the morn of the last day shall dawn, 
The sleeper will escape from the cloud of illusion; 
Laughter will overpower him at his own fancied grieves 
When he beholds his abiding home and place. 
Whatever you see in this sleep, both good and evil, 
Will all be exposed to view on the resurrection day. 
Whatever you have done during your sleep in the world 
Will be displayed to you clearly when you awake. 
Imagine not that these ill deeds of yours exist not 
In this sleep of yours, and will not be revealed to you. 
But your present laughter will turn to weeping and woe 
On the day of revealing, O you who oppress captives! 
Your present wailing and sorrow and grieves, 



3 



319 
Book Four 

On the other hand, will be joy when you awake, 

O you, who have rent the garments of many Josephs, 

You will rise from your heavy sleep as a wolf. 

Your bad qualities will rise in the shape of wolves 

And rend you limb from limb in vengeance. 

By the law of retaliation blood sleeps not after death; 

Say not, "I shall die and obtain pardon." 

The retaliation of this world is illusive, 

It is mere sport compared to the retaliation to come. 

Therefore God calls the world "a pastime and a sport, 

For punishment in this world is sport compared to that 

Here punishment is as the repression of quarrels, 

There it is as castration or circumcision. 

But this discourse is endless, O Moses, 

Go and leave these asses to their grazing! 

Let them fatten themselves with the food they love, 

For they are very wolves and objects of my wrath. 

Zu'l Qarnain at Mount Qaf. 

Zu'l Qarnain journeyed to Mount Qaf; 
He saw it was formed of a bright emerald, 
Forming as it were a ring round the world, 
Whereat all people are filled with wonder. 
He said, "Thou mighty hill, what are other hills? 



320 
The Masnavi 

Before thee they are mere playthings." 

The Mount replied, "Those hills are my veins, 

But they are not like me in beauty and importance. 

A hidden vein from me runs to every city, 

The quarters of the world are bound to my veins. 

When God desires an earthquake under any city, 

He bids me shake one of my veins. 

Then in anger I shake that vein 

Which is connected with that particular city. 

When He says, 'Enough,' my vein remains still, 

I remain still, and then haste to perform my work. 

Now still like a plaster, and now operating; 

Now still like thought, and then speaking my thought. 

But they who are void of reason imagine 

That these earthquakes proceed from earth's vapors." 

Just so an ant who saw a pen writing on paper, 

Delivered himself to another ant in this way 

'That pen is making very wonderful figures, 

Like hyacinths and lilies and roses.' 

The other said, 'The finger is the real worker, 

The pen is only the instrument of its working.' 

A third ant said, ' No; the action proceeds from the arm, 

The weak finger writes with the arm's might.' 

So it went on upwards, till at last 

A prince of the ants, who had some wit 

Said, 'Ye regard only the outward form of this marvel, 



321 
Book Four 

Which form becomes senseless in sleep and death. 

Form is only as a dress or a staff in the hand, 

It is only from reason and mind these figures proceed.' 

But he knew not that this reason and mind 

Would be but lifeless things without God's impulsion. 

The angel Gabriel appears to the Prophet Muhammad. 

Mustafa said to the angel Gabriel, 

"O friend, show me thy form as it really is; 

Show it to me openly and perceptibly, 

That I may behold thee with my eyes." 

Gabriel said, "Thou canst not do so, thou art too weak, 

Thy senses are exceeding weak and frail." 

Muhammad said, "Show it, that this body of mine may 

see 
To what extent its senses are frail and impotent. 
True, man's bodily senses are frail, 
But he possesses within him a mighty property. 
This body resembles flint and steel, 
But like them it has the power of kindling fire. 
Flint and steel are able to generate fire, 
From them springs fire which can destroy its parents." 

As he continued importuning him, Gabriel displayed 
His awful form, whereat the mountains were rent asunder. 
It occupied the sky from east to west. 



322 
The Masnavi 

And Mustafa swooned with fear. 

When Gabriel beheld him swooning with fear, 

He came and clasped him in his arms. 

Address to Husamu-'d-Din. 

O light of God, Husamu-'d-Din, admit 
This ass's head into that melon-garden! 
For when this ass is killed in the slaughter-house 
That kitchen will bestow upon him a new existence. 
From me proceeds the form, from thee the spirit; 
Nay, form and spirit both proceed from thee! 
Thou art as Muhammad in heaven, O brilliant Sun! 
Be also as Muhammad on earth forever and ever! 
So that earth and heaven on high may be united 
With one heart, one worship, one aspiration! 
And schism and polytheism and duality disappear, 
And Unity abide in the Real Spiritual Being! 
When my spirit recognizes thy spirit, 
We remember our essential union and origin. 

Notes: 

1 . Koran xlix. 1 . 

2. See the parallel passage in Gulshan i Raz, I. 317, and the 
note. It is based on the Aristotelian doctrine of the ascend- 



323 
Book Four 

ing grades of the soul, or vital principle. 

3. Koran xxix. 64. 

4. Zu'l Qarnain, Chaucer's Dulkarn, means "He of the two 
horns," and here denotes Alexander the Great. 

5. See the parallel passage in Gulshan i Raz, I. 431, and the 
note thereon. This property is the mystic "inner light" or 
spiritual intuition. 



THE SPIRITUAL COUPLETS 

OF 

MAULANA JALALU-'D-DIN MUHAMMAD RUMI 



Book V. 

STORY I. The Prophet and his Infidel Guest. 

AFTER the usual address to Husamu-'d-Din follows a 
comment on the precept addressed to Abraham, "Take four 
birds and draw them towards thee, and cut them in 
pieces." The birds are explained to be the duck of gluttony, 
the cock of concupiscence, the peacock of ambition and 
ostentation, and the crow of bad desires, and this is made 
the text of several stories. Beginning with gluttony, the poet 
tells the following story to illustrate the occasion of the 
Prophet's uttering the saying, Infidels eat with seven bellies, 
but the faithful with one." One day some infidels begged 
food and lodging of the Prophet. The Prophet was moved 
by their entreaties, and desired each of his disciples to take 
one of the infidels to his house and feed and lodge him, 
remarking that it was their duty to show kindness to 
strangers at his command, as much as to do battle with his 
foes. So each disciple selected one of the infidels and carried 
him off to his house; but there was one big and coarse man, 
a very giant Og, whom no one would receive, and the 
Prophet took him to his own house. In his house the 
Prophet had seven she-goats to supply his family with milk, 
and the hungry infidel devoured all the milk of those seven 



326 
The Masnavi 

goats, to say nothing of bread and other viands. He left not 
a drop for the Prophet's family, who were therefore much 
annoyed with him, and when he retired to his chamber one 
of the servant-maids locked him in. During the night the 
infidel felt very unwell in consequence of having overeaten 
himself, and tried to get out into the open air, but was 
unable to do so, owing to the door being locked. Finally, he 
was very sick, and defiled his bedding. In the morning he 
was extremely ashamed, and the moment the door was 
opened he ran away. The Prophet was aware of what had 
happened, but let the man escape, so as not to put him to 
shame. After he had gone the servants saw the mess he had 
made, and informed the Prophet of it; but the Prophet 
made light of it, and said he would clean it up himself. His 
friends were shocked at the thought of the Prophet soiling 
his sacred hands with such filth, and tried to prevent him, 
but he persisted in doing it, calling to mind the text, "As 
thou livest, O Muhammad, they were bewildered by drunk- 
enness," and being, in fact, urged to it by a divine com- 
mand. While he was engaged in the work the infidel came 
back to look for a talisman which he had left behind him in 
his hurry to escape, and seeing the Prophet's occupation he 
burst into tears, and bewailed his own filthy conduct. The 
Prophet consoled him, saying that weeping and penitence 
would purge the offence, for God says, "Little let them 
laugh, and much let them weep;" and again, "Lend God a 
liberal loan;" and again, "God only desireth to put away 



327 
Book Five 

filthiness from you as His household, and with cleansing to 
cleanse you." Prophet then urged him to bear witness that 
God was the Lord, even as was done by the sons of Adam, 
explained how the outward acts of prayer and fasting bear 
witness of the spiritual light within. After being nurtured on 
this spiritual food the infidel confessed the truth of Islam, 
and renounced his infidelity and gluttony. He returned 
thanks to the Prophet for bringing him to the knowledge of 
the true faith and regenerating him, even as 'Isa had regen- 
erated Lazarus. The Prophet was satisfied of his sincerity, 
and asked him to sup with him again. At supper he drank 
only half the portion of milk yielded by one goat, and stead- 
fastly refused to take more, saying he felt perfectly satisfied 
with the little he had already taken. The other guests mar- 
veled much to see his gluttony so soon cured, and were led 
to reflect on the virtues of the spiritual food administered to 
him by the Prophet. 

Outward acts bear witness of the state of the heart within. 

Prayer and fasting and pilgrimage and holy war 

Bear witness of the faith of the heart. 

Giving alms and offerings and quitting avarice 

Also bear witness of the secret thoughts. 

So, a table spread for guests serves as a plain sign, 

Saying, "O guest, I am your sincere well-wisher." 

So, offerings and presents and oblations 



328 
The Masnavi 

Bear witness, saying, "I am well pleased with you." 
Each of these men lavishes his wealth or pains, 
What means it but to say, "I have a virtue within me, 
Yea, a virtue of piety or liberality, 
Whereof my oblations and fasting bear witness"? 
Fasting proclaims that he abstains from lawful food, 
And that therefore he doubtless avoids unlawful food. 
And his alms say, "He gives away his own goods; 
It is therefore plain that he does not rob others." 

If he acts thus from fraud, his two witnesses 

(Fasting and alms) are rejected in God's court; 

If the hunter scatters grain 

Not out of mercy, but to catch game; 

If the cat keeps fast, and remains still 

In fasting only to entrap unwary birds; 

Making hundreds of people suspicious, 

And giving a bad name to men who fast and are liberal; 

Yet the grace of God, despite this fraud, 

May ultimately purge him from all this hypocrisy. 

Mercy may prevail over vengeance, and give the hypocrite 

Such light as is not possessed by the full moon. 

God may purge his dealings from that hypocrisy, 

And in mercy wash him clean of that defilement. 

In order that the pardoning grace of God may be seen, 

God pardons all sins that need pardon. 



329 
Book Five 

Wherefore God rains down water from the sign Pisces, 
To purify the impure from their impurities. 

Thus acts and words are witnesses of the mind within, 

From these two deduce inferences as to the thoughts. 

When your vision cannot penetrate within, 

Inspect the water voided by the sick man. 

Acts and words resemble the sick man's water, 

Which serves as evidence to the physician of the body. 

But the physician of the spirit penetrates the soul, 

And thence ascertains the man's faith. 

Such an one needs not the evidence of fair acts and words 

"Beware of such, they spy out the heart." 

Require this evidence of act and word only from one 

Who is not joined to the divine Ocean like a stream. 

But the light of the traveler arrived at the goal, 

Verily that light fills deserts and wastes. 

That witness of his is exempt from bearing witness, 

And from all trouble and risk and good works. 

Since the brilliance of that jewel beams forth, 

It is exempted from these obligations. 

Wherefore require not from him act and word evidence, 

Because both worlds through him bloom like roses. 

What is this evidence but manifestation of hidden things, 

Whether it be evidence in word, or deed, or otherwise? 

Accidents serve only to manifest the secret essence; 



330 
The Masnavi 

The essential quality abides, and accidents pass away. 
This mark of gold endures not the touchstone, 
But only the gold itself, genuine and undoubted. 
These prayers and holy war and fasting 
Will not endure, only the noble soul endures. 
The soul exhibits acts and words of this sort, 
Then it rubs its substance on the touchstone of God's 

command, 
Saying, "My faith is true, behold my witnesses!" 

But witnesses are open to suspicion. 

Know that witnesses must be purified, 

And their purification is sincerity, on that you may 

depend. 
The witness of word consists in speaking the truth, 
The witness of acts in keeping one's promises. 
If the witness of word lie, its evidence is rejected, 
And if the witness of act play false, it is rejected. 
Your words and acts must be without self-contradiction 
In order to be accepted without question. 

o 

"Your aims are different," and you contradict yourselves, 

You sew by day, and tear to pieces by night. 

How can God listen to such contradictory witness, 

Unless He be pleased to decide on it in mercy? 

Act and word manifest the secret thoughts and mind, 

Both of them expose to view the veiled secret. 

When your witnesses are purified they are accepted, 



331 
Book Five 

Otherwise they are arrested and kept in durance. 
They enter into conflict with you, O stiff-necked one; 
"Stand aloof and wait for them, for they too wait." 

Prayers for spiritual enlightenment. 

O God, who hast no peer, bestow Thy favor upon me; 
Since Thou hast with this discourse put a ring in my ear, 
Take me by the ear, and draw me into that holy assembly 
Where Thy saints in ecstasy drink of Thy pure wine! 
Now that Thou hast caused me to smell its perfume, 
Withhold not from me that musky wine, O Lord of faith 
Of Thy bounty all partake, both men and women, 
Thou art ungrudging in bounties, O Hearer of prayer. 
Prayers are granted by Thee before they are uttered, 
Thou openest the door to admit hearts every moment! 
How many letters Thou writest with Thy Almighty pen! 
Through marveling thereat stones become as wax. 
Thou writest the Nun of the brow, the Sad of the eye, 
And the Jim of the ear, to amaze reason and sense. 
These letters exercise and perplex reason; 
Write on, O skilful Fair-writer! 

Imprinting every moment on Not-being the fair forms 
Of the world of ideals, to confound all thought! 
Yea, copying thereon the fair letters of the page of ideals, 
To wit, eye and brow and moustache and mole! 
For me, I will be a lover of Not-being, not of existence, 



332 
The Masnavi 



Because the beloved of Not-being is more blessed. 

God made reason a reader of all these letters, 

To suggest to it reflections on that outpouring of grace. 

Reason, like Gabriel, learns day by day 

1 3 
Its daily portion from the "Indelible Tablet." 

Behold the letters written without hands on Not-being! 

Behold the perplexity of mankind at those letters! 

Every one is bewildered by these thoughts, 

And digs for hidden treasure in hope to find it. 



This bewilderment of mankind as to their true aims is 

compared to the bewilderment of men in the dark 

looking in all directions for the Qibla, and 

recalls the text, "O the misery that rests 

,14 

upon my servants. 

Then follow reflections on the sacrifice by Abraham of 
the peacock of ambition and ostentation. Next comes a dis- 
course on the thesis that all men can recognize the mercies 
of God and the wrath of God; but God's mercies are often 
hidden in His chastisements, and vice versa, and it is only 
men of deep spiritual discernment who can recognize acts of 
mercy and acts of wrath concealed in their opposites. The 
object of this concealment is to try and test men's disposi- 
tions; according to the text, "To prove which of you will be 
most righteous in deed." 



333 
Book Five 

Notes: 

1. Koran ii. 262. 

2. Koran xv. 72. 

3. Koran ix. 33. 

4. Koran lxxiii. 20. 

5. Koran xxxiii. 33. 

6. Koran vii. 171. 

7. "Islam is the baptism of God" (Koran ii. 132). 

8. Koran xcii. 4. 

9. Koran xxxii. 30. i.e., Wait thou for their punishment, as 
they wait for thy downfall (Rodwell). 

10. Here we have another Platonic doctrine. "Some say the 
belief of the Sufis is the same as that of the Ishraqin 
(Platonists)." Dabistan i Muzahib, by Shea and Troyer, iii. 
281. 

1 1. I.e., I will recognize the nonentity of all this phenomenal 
being, and court self-annihilation. 

12. The Bulaq translator renders An naward thus. 

13. The "Indelible Tablet" (of God's decrees) is here applied to 
the Logos-the channel through whom God renews the 
"world of creation" day by day. 

14. Koran xxxvi. 29. 

15. Koran lxvii. 2. 



334 
The Masnavi 

STORY II. The Arab and his Dog. 

The doctrine of the Mu'tazilites, mentioned, that all 
men's intellects are alike and equal at birth, is again contro- 
verted, and the poet dwells on the essential differences 
which characterize the intellects akin to Universal Reason or 
the Logos, and those swayed by partial or carnal reason; the 
former, like the children of Israel, seeking exaltation 
through self-abasement; and the others, like Pharaoh, run- 
ning after worldly rank and power, to their own destruc- 
tion. In order to make probation of men, as already 
explained, God fills the world with deceptions, making 
apparent blessings destructive to us, and apparent evils salu- 
tary. On the other hand, if men try to deceive God, they fail 
signally. Hypocritical weeping and wailing like that of 
Josephs brethren is at once detected by God. Thus a certain 
Arab had a dog to which he was much attached; but one day 
the dog died of hunger. He at once began to weep and wail, 
and disturbed the whole neighborhood by his ostentatious 
grief One of the neighbors came and inquired into the mat- 
ter, and on hearing that the dog had died of hunger, he 
asked the Arab why he had not fed him from the wallet of 
food which he had in his hand. The Arab said that he had 
collected this food to support himself, and made it a prin- 
ciple not to part with any of it to any one who could not 
pay for it; but that, as his tears cost him nothing, he was 



335 
Book Five 

pouring them forth in token of the sorrow he felt for his 
dog's death. The neighbor, on hearing this, rebuked him for 
his hypocrisy, and went his way. Then follows a commen- 
tary on the text, "Almost would the infidels strike thee 
down with their very looks when they hear the reading of 
the Koran." 

Notes: 

1. The Mu'tazilites were one of the principal unorthodox sects. 
See Sale, Prelim. Disc, p. 112. 

2. "Of them who devise stratagems, God is beast" (Koran iii. 
47). 

3. Koran lxviii. 5 1 . 



STORY III. The Sage and the Peacock. 

A sage went out to till his field, and saw a peacock busily 
engaged in destroying his own plumage with his beak. At 
seeing this insane self-destruction the sage could not refrain 
himself, but cried out to the peacock to forbear from muti- 
lating himself and spoiling his beauty in so wanton a man- 
ner. The peacock then explained to him that the bright 
plumage which he admired so much was a fruitful source of 
danger to its unfortunate owner, as it led to his being con- 



336 
The Masnavi 

stantly pursued by hunters, whom he had no strength to 
contend against; and he had accordingly decided on ridding 
himself of it with his own beak, and making himself so ugly 
that no hunter would in future care to molest him. The poet 
proceeds to point out that worldly cleverness and accom- 
plishments and wealth endanger man's spiritual life, like the 
peacock's plumage; but, nevertheless, they are appointed for 
our probation, and without such trials there can be no 
virtue. 



"There is no monkery in Islam. " 



Tear not thy plumage off it cannot be replaced; 
Disfigure not thy face in wantonness, O fair one! 
That face which is bright as the forenoon sun, 
To disfigure it were a grievous sin. 
'Twere paganism to mar such a face as thine! 
The moon itself would weep to lose sight of it! 
Knowest thou not the beauty of thine own face? 
Quit this temper that leads thee to war with thyself] 
It is the claws of thine own foolish thoughts 
That in spite wound the face of thy quiet soul. 
Know such thoughts to be claws fraught with poison, 
Which score deep wounds on the face of thy soul. 

Rend not thy plumage off, but avert thy heart from it 
For hostility between them is the law of this holy war. 



337 
Book Five 

Were there no hostility, that war would be impossible. 
Hadst thou no lust, obedience to the law could not be. 
Hadst thou no concupiscence there could be no absti- 
nence. 
Where no antagonist, what need is there of armies? 
Ah! make not thyself an eunuch, not a monk, 
Because chastity is mortgaged to lust. 
Without lust denial of lust is impossible 
No man can display bravery against the dead. 
God says, "Expend;" wherefore earn money. 
Since expenditure is impossible without previous gain? 
Although the passage contains only the word "Expend," 
Read "Acquire first, and then expend." 
In like manner, when the King of kings says "Abstain," 
It implies an object of desire wherefrom to abstain. 
Again, "Eat ye," is said recognising the snares of lust, 
And afterwards, " Exceed not," to enjoin temperance. 
When there is no subject, 
The existence of a predicate is not possible. 
When thou endurest not the pains of abstinence 
And fulfillest not the terms, thou gainest no reward. 
How easy those terms! how abundant that reward! 
A reward that enchants the heart and charms the soul! 

This is followed by the admonition that the only way to 
be safe from one's internal enemies is to annihilate self, a,nd 
to be absorbed in the eternity of God, as the light of the stars 



338 
The Masnavi 

is lost in the light of the noonday sun. Everything but God 
is at once preyed on by others, and itself preys on others, like 
the fowl which, when catching a worm, was itself caught by 
a cat. Men are so intent on their own low objects of pursuit 
that they see not their foes who are trying to make them 
their prey. Thus it is said, "Before them have we set a barri- 

o 

er, and behind them a barrier, so that they shall not see." 
Persons who lust after the vile pleasures of this world, and 
desire long life, not to serve God, but to satisfy their own 
carnal lusts, resemble the crow slain by Abraham, because he 
only lived for the sake of carrion; or Iblis, who prayed to be 
respited till the day of judgment, not for the purpose of 
reforming himself but only to do mischief to mankind. 

Prayers to God to change our base inclinations 
and give us higher aspirations. 

Thou that changest earth into gold, 

And out of other earth madest the father of mankind, 
Thy business is changing things and bestowing favors, 
My business is mistakes and forgetfulness and error. 
Change my mistakes and forgetfulness to knowledge; 

1 am altogether vile, make me temperate and meek. 
O Thou that convertest salt earth into bread, 

And bread again into the life of men; 

Thou who madest the erring soul a guide to men, 

And him that erred from the way a prophet; 



339 
Book Five 

Thou makest some earth-born men as heaven, 

And muitipliest heaven-born saints on earth! 

But whoso seeks his water of life in worldly joys, 

To him comes death quicker than to the rest. 

The eyes of the heart which behold the heavens 

See that the Almighty Alchemist is ever working here. 

Mankind are ever being changed, and God's elixir 

Joins the body's garment without aid of needle. 

On the day that you entered upon existence, 

You were first fire, or earth, or air. 

If you had continued in that, your original state, 

How could you have arrived at this dignity of humanity? 

But through change your first existence remained not 

In lien thereof God gave you a better existence 

In like manner He will give you thousands of existences, 

One after another, the succeeding ones better than the former. 

Regard your original state, not the mean states, 

For these mean states remove you from your origin. 

As these mean states increase, union recedes; 

As they decrease, the unction of union increases. 

From knowing means and causes holy bewilderment fails; 

Yea, the bewilderment that leads you to God's presence. 

You have obtained these existences after annihilations; 

Wherefore, then, do you shrink from annihilation? 

What harm have these annihilations done you 

That you cling so to present existence, O simpleton? 

Since the latter of your states were better than the former, 



340 
The Masnavi 

Seek annihilation and adore change of state. 
You have already seen hundreds of resurrections 
Occur every moment from your origin till now; 
One from the inorganic state to the vegetive state, 
From the vegetive state to the animal state of trial; 
Thence again to rationality and good discernment; 
Again you will rise from this world of sense and form. 

Ah! O crow, give up this life and live anew! 

In view of God's changes cast away your life! 

Choose the new, give up the old, 

For each single present year is better than three past. 

This is followed by a commentary on the saying of the 
Prophet, "Pity the pious man who falls into sin, and the rich 
man who falls into poverty, and the wise man who falls into 
the company of fools." This is illustrated by an anecdote of 
a young deer who was placed in the asses stable, and jeered 
at and maltreated by them. This suggests  

Notes: 

1. AHadis. 

2. Cp. Bp. Butler, "On a state of probation as implying trial 
and danger" (Analogy, Chap. iv. Pt. 1). 

3. Probably referring to Origin. 

4. Koran ii. 264. 



341 
Book Five 

5. Koran iii. 200. 

6. Koran vi. 142: "Eat of their fruit, but be not prodigal, and 
exceed not." 

7. Or, "If there be no supporter, there can be nothing support- 
ed." 

8. Koran xxxvi. 8. 

9. Koran vii. 13. 

10. Koran xciii. 7. 



STORY IV. Muhammad Khwarazm Shah 
and the Rafizis of Sabzawar. 

Muhammad Shah was the last prince but one of the 
Khwarazm dynasty of Balkh, to which family both the 
poet's mother and grandmother belonged. He was the 
reigning prince in AD. 1209, the year in which the poet's 
father fled from Balkh, and was defeated by Chingiz Khan 
a year or two later. In one of his campaigns Muhammad 
Shah captured the city of Sabzawar, in Khorasan, which city 
as inhabited by Rafizis or rank Shi'as, naturally most obnox- 
ious to a Sunni prince claiming descent from the first 
Khahif Abu Bakr. After the city was taken the inhabitants 
came out, and proceeded with all humility to beg their lives, 
offering to pay any amount of ransom and tribute that he 
might impose upon them. But the prince replied that he 
would spare their lives only on one condition, viz., that they 



342 
The Masnavi 

produced from Sabzawar a man bearing the name Abu 
Bakr. They represented to him that it would be impossible 
to find in the whole city a single man bearing a name so 
hateful to the Shi'as; but the prince was inexorable, and 
refused to alter the conditions. So they went and searched 
all the neighbourhood, and at last found a traveler lying at 
the roadside at the point of death, who bore the name of 
Abu Bakr. As he was unable to walk, they placed him on a 
bier and carried him into the king's presence. The king 
reproached them for their contempt and neglect of this 
pious Sunni, the only true heart amongst them, and 
reminded them of the saying of the Prophet, "God regards 
not your outward show and your wealth, but your hearts 
and your deeds." In this parable, says the poet, Sabzawar is 
the world, the poor Sunni the man of God, despised and 
rejected of men, and the king is God Almighty, who seeks a 
true heart amongst evil men. 

Satan's snares for mankind. 

Thus spake cursed Iblis to the Almighty, 
"I want a mighty trap to catch human game withal." 
God gave him gold and silver and troops of horses 
Saying, "You can catch my creatures with these." 
Iblis said, "Bravo!" but at the same time hung his lip, 
And frowned sourly like a bitter orange. 



343 
Book Five 

Then God offered gold and jewels from precious mines 

To that laggard in the faith, 

Saying, "Take these other traps, O cursed one." 

But Iblis said, "Give me more, O blessed Defender." 

God gave him succulent and sweet and costly wines, 

And also store of silken garments. 

But Iblis said, " O Lord, I want more aids than these, 

In order to bind men in my twisted rope 

So firmly that Thy adorers, who are valiant men 

May not, man-like, break my bonds asunder." 

When at last God showed him the beauty of women, 
Which bereaves men of reason and self-control, 
Then Iblis clapped his hands and began to dance, 
Saying, "Give me these; I shall quickly prevail with these!" 

This is followed by comments on the text, "Of goodliest 
fabric we created man, and then brought him down to the 
lowest of the low, saving those who believe and do the 
things that are right;" and on the verses, "If thou goest the 
road, they will show thee the road; If thou becomest 
naught, they will turn thee to being." 

Notes: 

1. Koran xcv. 4. 



344 
The Masnavi 

STORY V. The Man who claimed to be a Prophet. 

A man cried out to the people, "I am a prophet; yea, the 
most excellent of the prophets." The people seized him by 
the collar, saying, "How are you any more a prophet than 
we are?" He replied, "Ye came to earth from the spirit-world 
as sleeping children, seeing nothing of the way; but I came 
hither with my eyes open, and marked all the stages of the 
way like a guide." On this they led him before the king, and 
begged the king to punish him. The king, seeing that he was 
very infirm, took pity on him, and led him apart and asked 
him where his home was. The man replied, "O king, my 
home is in the house of peace (heaven), and I am come 
thence into this house of reproach." The king then asked 
him what he had been eating to make him rave as he did, 
and he said if he lived on mere earthly bread he should not 
have claimed to be a prophet. His preaching was entirely 
thrown away on worldly men, who only desire to hear news 
of gold or women, and are annoyed with all who speak to 
them of the eternal life to come. They cleave to the present 
life so fast that they hate those who tell them of another. 
They say, "Ye are telling us old fables and raving idly;" and 
when they see pious men prospering they envy them, and, 
like Satan, become more opposed to them. God said, 
"What thinkest thou of him who holdeth back a servant of 

9 

God when he prayeth?" 



345 
Book Five 

The king then said to him, "What is this inspiration of 
yours, and what profit do you derive from it?" The man 
answered, "What profit is there that I do not derive from it? 
I grant I am not rich in worldly wealth, yet the inspiration 
God teaches me is surely as precious as that which He 
taught the bees. God taught them to make wax and honey, 
and He teaches me nobler things than these. Whoso has his 
face reddened with celestial wine is a prophet of like dispo- 
sition with Muhammad, and whoso is unaffected by that 
spiritual drink is to be accounted an enemy to God and 
man." 

The Prophet's prayer for the envious people. 

O Thou that givest aliment and power and stability, 

Set free the people from their instability. 

To the soul that is bent double by envy 

Give uprightness in the path of duty, 

Give them self-control, "weigh down their scales," 

Release them from the arts of deceivers. 

Redeem them from envying, O gracious One, 

That through envy they be not stoned like Iblis. 

Even in their fleeting prosperity, see how the people 

Burn up wealth and men through envy! 

See the kings who lead forth their armies 

To slay their own people from envy! 



346 
The Masnavi 

Lovers of sweethearts have conceived jealousy, 

And attempted one another's lives, 

Read " Wais and Ramin" and "Khosrau and Shirin" 

To see what these fools have done to one another. 

Lovers and beloved have both perished; 

And not themselves only, but their love as well. 

'Tis God alone who agitates these nonentities 

Making one nonentity fall in love with another. 

In the heart that is no heart envy comes to a head, 

Thus Being troubles nonentity. 

This is followed by an anecdote of a lover who recounted 
to his mistress all the services he had done, and all the toils 
he had undergone for her sake, and inquired if there was 
anything else he could do to testify the sincerity of his love. 
His mistress replied, "All these things you have done are but 
the branches of love; you have not yet attained to the root, 
which is to give up life itself for the sake of your beloved." 
The lover accordingly gave up his life, and enjoyed eternal 
fruition of his love, according to the text, "O thou soul 
which art at rest, return to thy Lord, pleased, and pleasing 
Him." 6 

This is followed by a statement of the doctrine of the 
jurist Abu Hanifa, to whose school the poet belonged, that 
weeping, even aloud, during prayer does not render the 
prayers void, provided that the weeping be caused by 



347 
Book Five 

thoughts of the world to come, and not by thoughts of this 
present world. And, apparently in allusion to the name 
Abu Hanifa, the poet recalls the text, "They followed the 

o 

faith of Abraham, the orthodox" (Hanifun). 
Notes: 

1. Koran iii. 22. 

2. Koran xcvi. 9. 

3. Koran xvi. 70. 

4. Koran ci. 5. 

5. Koran xv. 17. The sin of Iblis was his envy of Adam. 

6. Koran lxxxix. 27 

7. Mishkat ul Masabih, i. p. 209, note. 

8. Koran iv. 124. 



STORY VI. The Disciple who blindly imitated his Shaikh. 

An ignorant youth entered an assembly of pious persons 
who were being addressed by a holy Shaikh. He saw the 
Shaikh weeping copiously, and in mere blind and senseless 
imitation he copied the Shaikh's behavior, and wept as copi- 
ously himself, though he understood not a word of the dis- 
course. In fact, he behaved just like a deaf man who sees 
those around him laughing, and laughs himself out of com- 



348 
The Masnavi 

pliment to them, though he knows not the subject of their 
merriment, and is obliged to have it explained to him before 
he can laugh again with real perception of the joke. After he 
had wept in this ignorant way for some time he made due 
obeisance to the Shaikh, and took his departure. But one of 
the Shaikhs true disciples, being jealous for the honor of his 
master, followed him, and thus addressed him, "I adjure 
you by Allah that you go not and say, 'I saw the Shaikh 
weeping, and I too wept like him.' Your ignorant and mere 
imitative weeping is totally unlike the weeping of that holy 
saint. Such weeping as his is only possible to one who has, 
like him, waged the spiritual war for thirty years. His weep- 
ing is not caused by worldly grieves, but by the deep con- 
cerns of the spirit. You cannot perceive by reason or sense 
the spiritual mysteries that are open and plain to his enlight- 
ened vision, any more than the darkness can behold the 
light. His breathings are as those of 'Isa, and not like mere 
human sighs raised by worldly sorrows. His tears and his 
smiles and his speeches are not his own, but proceed from 
Allah. Fools like you are ignorant of the motive and design 
of saints' actions, and therefore only harm themselves if they 
try to imitate them, without understanding their meaning." 
To illustrate this a curious story is told of a foolish lady who 
copied a trick of her clever slave-girl, without understand- 
ing the modus operandi, and by so doing caused her own 
death. In like manner parrots are taught to speak without 



349 
Book Five 

understanding the words. The method is to place a mirror 
between the parrot and the trainer. The trainer, hidden by 
the mirror, utters the words, and the parrot, seeing his own 
reflection in the mirror, fancies another parrot is speaking, 
and imitates all that is said by the trainer behind the mirror. 
So God uses prophets and saints as mirrors whereby to 
instruct men, being Himself all the time hidden behind 
these mirrors, viz., the bodies of these saints and prophets; 
and men, when they hear the words proceeding from these 
mirrors, are utterly ignorant that they are really being spo- 
ken by "Universal Reason" or the "Word of God" behind 
the mirrors of the saints. 

The worthlessness of mere blind imitation (taqlid) 
of religious exercises. 

When a friend tells a joke to his friend, 

The deaf man who listens laughs twice over; 

The first time from imitation and foolishness, 

Because he sees all the party laughing; 

Yet, though he laughs like the others, 

He is then ignorant of the subject of their laughter; 

Then he inquires what the laughter was about, 

And, on hearing it, proceeds to laugh a second time. 

Wherefore the blind imitator is like a deaf man, 

In regard to the joy he feigns to feel. 



350 
The Masnavi 

The light is the Shaikh's, the fountain the Shaikh's, 

And the outpouring of joy is also the Shaikh's, not his. 

'Tis like water in a vessel, or light through a glass; 

If they think they come from themselves, they are wron 

When the vessel leaves the fountain, it sees its error; 

It sees the water in it comes from the fountain. 

The glass also learns, when the moon sets, 

That its light proceeded from the shining of the moon. 

When his eyes are opened by the command, "Arise!" 

Then that disciple smiles a second time, like the dawn. 

He laughs also at his own previous laughter, 

Which overtook him out of mere blind imitation. 

When he returns from his long and distant wanderings 

He says, "Lo! this was the truth, this the secret! 

With what blindness and misconception did I pretend. 

To experience joy in that distant valley? 

What a delusion I was under! what a mistake! 

My feeble wit conjured up vain imaginations." 

How can an infant on the road know the thoughts of 

men? 
How far its fancies are removed from true knowledge! 
The thoughts of infants run on the nurse and milk, 
Or on raisins or nuts, or on crying and wailing. 

The blind imitator is like a feeble infant, 

Even though he possesses fine arguments and proofs. 



351 
Book Five 

His preoccupation with obscure arguments and proofs 

Drags him away from insight into truth. 

His stock of lore, which is the salve of his eyes, 

Bears him off and plunges him in difficult questions. 

Ah! man of imitation, come out of Bokhara! 

And humble yourself in order to be exalted. 

Then you will, behold another Bokhara within you, 

Whereof the heroes ignore these questions of law. 

Though a footman may be swift of foot on land, 

Yet on the sea he is as one with ruptured tendons. 

That footman is only "carried by land," 

But he who is "carried by sea" is the truly learned one. 

The King of kings showers special favors upon him; 

Know this, O man pledged to vain illusions! 

The mere legal theologian is impotent 
to behold the light of the Spirit. 

When the day dawns from heaven night flees away; 
What, then, can its darkness know of the nature of light? 
The gnat scuds away before the blast of the winds; 
What, then, knows the gnat of the savor of the winds? 
When the Eternal appears the transitory is annulled; 
What, then, knows he transitory of the Eternal? 
When He sets foot on the transitory He bewilders it; 
When it is become naught He sheds his light upon it, 



352 
The Masnavi 

If you wish, you can adduce hundreds of precedents, 
But I take no heed of them, O man poor in spirit! 
The letters Lam, Mim, and Ha, Mim prefixed to some 

Suras 
Resemble the staff of Moses, when fully understood. 
Ordinary letters resemble these 'to outward view, 
But are far beneath them in signification. 
If an ordinary man 'take a staff and try it, 
Will it prove like the staff of Moses in the test? 
This breath of 'Isa is not like every ordinary breath, 
Which proceeds from mere human joy or sorrow. 
These Alif, Mim, Ha and Mim, O father, 
Proceed from the Lord of mankind. 
If you have sense, regard not in the same way as these 
Every ordinary Alif and Lam which resembles these; 
Although these sacred letters consist of common ones, 
And resemble common ones in their composition. 
Muhammad himself was formed of flesh and skin, 
Although no man is of the same genus as he. 
He had flesh and skin and bones, 
Although no man resembles him in composition; 
Because in his composition were contained divine powers, 
Whereby all human flesh was confounded. 
In like manner the composition of the letters Ha, Mim 
Is far exalted above ordinary compounds of letters; 
Because from these mysterious compositions comes life, 



353 
Book Five 

Even as utter confusion follows the last trump. 

That staff becomes a serpent and divides the Nile, 

Like the staff of Ha, Mim, by the grace of God. 

Its outward form resembles the outward forms of others, 

Yet the disk of a cake differs much from the moon's disk. 

The saint's weeping and laughter and speech 

Are not his own, but proceed from God. 

Whereas fools look only to outward appearances, 

These mysteries are totally hidden from them; 

Of necessity the real meaning is veiled from them, 

For the mystery is lost in the intervening medium. 

Then follows an anecdote of a man who heard whelps 
barking in their mother's womb. A voice came from heaven 
and explained that these whelps were like the men who have 
not emerged into the light of truth, but are still veiled in 
spiritual darkness, and, though they make pretensions to 
spiritual sight, their discourses are useless, both to procure 
spiritual food for themselves, and to warn their hearers of 
spiritual dangers. 

Next comes an anecdote of a pious man of Zarwan, who 
made a point of giving to the poor four times the legal 
amount of alms due from his growing crops. Thus, instead 
of paying one-tenth on each crop, which is the legal amount 
enjoined by the Prophet, 6 he was wont to pay one-tenth of 



354 
The Masnavi 

the green ears of corn, another tenth of the ripe wheat, a 
third tenth of the threshed grain, and a fourth of the bread 
made therefrom, and so on with grapes and other produce 
of hi garden. In recognition of his piety God blessed his gar- 
den and made it bear fruit abundantly. But his sons, who 
were blind to spiritual matters, saw only his lavish expendi- 
ture upon the poor, and could not see the divine blessing 
upon the garden, called down by his liberality, and rebuked 
him for his extravagance. There is no limit to the divine 
bounty, because God's ability to bestow bounties, unlike 
human ability, is unbounded and infinite. 

Notes: 

1. Koran lxxiv. 2. Dawn smiles first as "false dawn," and the 
second time as "true dawn." 

2. Alluding to Bokhari, the author of the "Sahih Bokhari," the 
first and most esteemed collection of traditions. 

3. Koran xvii. 72. The man of "external knowledge" is "carried 
only by land," but the mystic is led over sea as well. 

4. When reason is annihilated, the "Truth" is reflected in the 
resulting caput mortuum or Not-being, as in a mirror 
(Gulshan i Raz, I. 125). 

5. These letters were supposed to have mysterious meanings. 
See Rodwell, Koran, p. 17, note. 

6. Miskat ul Masabih, i. 417. 



355 
Book Five 

STORY VII. How Adam was created out of 
a handful of earth brought by an Angel. 

When the Almighty determined to create mankind to be 
proved by good and evil, He deputed the angel Gabriel to 
bring a handful of earth for the purpose of forming Adam's 
body. Gabriel accordingly girded his loins and proceeded to 
the Earth to execute the divine commands. But the Earth, 
being apprehensive that the man so created would rebel 
against God and draw down God's curse upon her, remon- 
strated with Gabriel, and besought him to forbear. She rep- 
resented that Gabriel would at the last day be pre-eminent 
over all the eight angels who would then support the 
throne, and that it therefore was only right that he should 
prefer mercy to judgment. At last Gabriel granted her 
prayer, and returned to heaven without taking the handful 
of earth. Then God deputed Michael on the same errand, 
and the Earth made similar excuses to him, and he also lis- 
tened to her crying, and returned to heaven without taking 
a handful. He excused himself to the Almighty by citing the 
example of the people to whom the prophet Jonah was sent, 
who were delivered from the threatened penalty in conse- 
quence of their lamentation for their sins; and the text, "If 
He please, He will deliver you from that which ye shall cry 
to Him to avert." Then God sent the angel Israfil on the 
same errand, and he also was diverted from the execution of 



356 
The Masnavi 

it by a divine intimation. At last God sent 'Izrail, the angel 
of death, who, being of sterner disposition than the others, 
resolutely shut his ears to the Earth's entreaties, and brought 
back the required handful of earth. The Earth pressed him 
with the argument that God's command to bear away a 
handful of her substance against her will did not override 
the other divine command to take pity on suppliants; but 
'Izrail would not listen to her, remarking that, according to 
the canons of theological interpretation, it was not allow- 
able to have recourse to analogical reasoning to evade a 
plain and categorical injunction. He added, that in execut- 
ing this injunction, painful though it might be, he was to be 
regarded only as a spear in the hand of the Almighty. The 
moral is, that when any of God's creatures do us a harm, we 
ought to regard them only as instruments of God, who is 
the Only Real Agent. 

God the Only Real Agent. 

Do not, like fools, crave mercy from the spear, 

But from the King in whose hand the spear is held. 

Wherefore do you cry to spear and sword, 

Seeing they are captives in the hand of that Noble One? 

He is as Azar, maker of idols; I am only the idol; 

Whatever instrument He makes me, that I am. 

If He makes of me a cup, a cup am I; 

If He makes of me a dagger, a dagger am I. 



357 
Book Five 

If He makes me a fountain, I pour forth water; 

If He makes me fire, I give forth heat. 

If He makes me rain, I produce rich crops; 

If He makes me a dart, I pierce bodies. 

If He makes me a snake, I dart forth poison; 

If He makes me a friend, I serve my friends. 

I am as the pen in the fingers of the writer, 

I am not in a position to obey or not at will. 

On the return of 'Izrail to heaven with the handful of 
earth, God said he would make him the angel of death. 
'Izrail represented that this would make him very hateful to 
men; but God said 'Izrail would operate by disease and sick- 
ness, and men would not look for any cause beyond these 
diseases, according to the text, "He is nearer to you than ye 
are; yet ye see Him not." Moreover, death is in reality a 
boon to the spiritual, and it is only fools who cry, "Would 
that this world might endure for ever, and that there were 
no such thing as death!" 



Death is gain, for "God will 
their evil things into 



One said, "The world would be a pleasant place 
If death never set foot within it." 
Another answered, "If there were no death, 
The complicated world would be worth not a jot. 



358 
The Masnavi 

It would be a crop raised in a desert, 

Left neglected and never threshed out. 

Thou fanciest that to be death, which is life, 

Thou sowest thy seed in salt ground. 

Carnal reason deceives us; do thou contradict it, 

For that fool takes what is really death to be life. 

O God, show us all things in this house of deception, 

Show them all as they really are!" 

It is said in the Hadis that on the last day 

The command, "Arise," will come to every single body. 

The blast of the last trump will be God's command 

To every atom to lift its head from the earth. 

The souls, also, of each will return to their bodies, 

Even as sense returns to bodies awaking from sleep. 

On that morn each soul will recognize its own body, 

And return to its own ruin like hidden treasure. 

It will recognize its own body and enter it. 

The soul of the goldsmith will not enter the tailor; 

The soul of the wise will enter the body of the wise, 

The soul of the unjust the body of the unjust. 

In like manner as the souls will fly into their clay, 
So will the books fly into their right hands and left. 
God will place in their hands their books of greed and lib- 
erality, 
Of sin and piety, and whatever they have practiced. 



359 
Book Five 

When they shall awake from sleep on that morning, 
All the evil and good they have done will recur to them. 

Every thought which has dwelt in them during life 

Will appear as a form visible to all, 

Like the thought of an architect realized in a house, 

Or the perfect plant issuing from the seed in the ground. 

From onion and saffron and poppy 

The hand of spring will unfold the secret of winter. 

This one will be verdant and flourish, saying, "We are the 

pious;" 
That other will hang his head like the violet, 
With tears starting from his eyes through deadly fear; 
Yea, tens of founts of tears through terrible dread; 
With eyes wide opened in deadly apprehension 
Lest his book may be placed in his left hand. 

Then will the evildoer be sent to the fiery prison, 
For thorn can in no wise escape the flame. 
When his guardian angels behind and before, 
Who before were unseen, shall appear like patrols, 
They will hurry him off, pricking him with their spears, 
And saying, "O dog, begone to thy kennel!" 

Then the prisoner will cry, "O Lord, I am a hundred, 
Yea, a hundred times as wicked as Thou sayest. 



360 

The Masnavi 

But in mercy Thou veilest my sins, 

Otherwise my vileness were known to Thy all-seeing 

eye. 
But, independently of my own works and warfare, 
Independently of my faith or unfaith, good or evil, 
Independently of my poor devotion to Thee, 
And of my thoughts and the thoughts of hundreds like 

me, 
I fix my hopes on Thy mercy alone. 
Whether Thou adjudge me upright or rebellious, 
I sue for free pardon from Thy unbought justice. 

Lord, who art gracious without thought of conse- 
quence, 

1 set my face towards that free grace of Thine; 
I have no regard to my own acts. 

I set my face towards this hope, 
Seeing that Thou gayest me my being first of all; 
Thou gayest me the garment of being unasked, 
Wherefore I firmly trust in Thy free grace. 

When he thus enumerates his sins and faults, 
God at last will grant him pardon as a free gift, 
Saying, "O angels, bring him back to me, 
Since the eyes of his heart were set on hope, 
Without care for consequences I set him free, 
And draw the pen through the record of his sins!" 



361 
Book Five 

Notes: 

1. Koran lxix. 17. 

2. Koran x. 98. 

3. Koran vi 41. 

4. Koran lvi. 84. 

5. Koran xxv. 70. The "final restitution" of all by free grace. 

6. Cp. the Hadis: "Inspiration is a light that shines in the 
heart, and shows the nature of all things as they really are. 

7. See Koran lxix. 18. 

8. See the parallel passage in Guishan i Raz, 1, 690. 



STORY VIII. Mahmud and Ayaz. 1 



Mahmud, the celebrated king of Ghazni, had a favorite 
named Ayaz, who was greatly envied by the other courtiers. 
One day they came to the king and informed him that Ayaz 
was in the habit of retiring to a secret chamber, and locking 
himself in, and that they suspected he had there concealed 
coin stolen from the treasury, or else wine and forbidden 
drink. The fact was, that Ayaz had placed in that chamber 
his old shoes and the ragged dress which he used to wear 
before the king had promoted him to honor, and used to 
retire there every day and wear them for a time, in order to 
remind himself of his lowly origin, and to prevent himself 



362 
The Masnavi 

from being puffed up with pride. This he did in accordance 
with the text, "Let man reflect out of what he was created." 
The intoxication of the present life puffs up many with false 
pride, even as Iblis, who refused to worship Adam, saying, 
"Who is Adam, that he should be lord over me?" This he 
said because he was one of the Jinn, who are all created of 
fire. Adam, on the other hand, confessed his own vileness, 
saying, "Thou hast formed me out of clay." The king was 
well assured of the fidelity of Ayaz; but in order to confute 
those who suspected him, he ordered them to go by night 
and break open that chamber and bring away all the trea- 
sure and other things hidden in it. It is a characteristic of 
evildoers to think evil of the saints, because they judge of 
their conduct by the light of their own evil natures, as the 
crooked foot makes a crooked footprint, and as the spider 
sees things distorted through the web he has spun himself 
The hug's conduct in this did not betoken any diminution 
of his love for Ayaz, because lover and beloved are always as 
ono soul, though they may be opposed to outward view. 
Accordingly the courtiers proceeded to the chamber of Ayaz 
at night, and broke open the door, and searched the floor 
and the walls, but found only the old shoes and the ragged 
dress. They then returned to the king discomfited and 
shamefaced, even as the wicked who have slandered the 
saints will be on the day of judgment, according to the text, 
"On the resurrection day thou shalt see those who have lied 
of God with their faces black." Then they besought the 



363 
Book Five 

king to pardon their offence, but he refused, saying that 
their offence had been committed against Ayaz, and that he 
would leave it to Ayaz to decide whether they should be 
punished or pardoned. If Ayaz showed mercy it would be 
well; and if he punished it would be well also, for "the law 
of retaliation is the security for life." Only he enjoined him 
to pronounce his sentence without delay, because "Waiting 
is punishment." 

A description of genuine union with God. 

A loved one said to her lover to try him, 

Early one morning, "O such an one, son of such an one, 

I marvel whether you hold me more dear, 

Or yourself; tell me truly, O ardent suitor!" 

He answered, "I am so entirely absorbed in you, 

That I am full of you from head to foot. 

Of my own existence nothing but the name remains 

In my being is nothing besides you, O Object of desire! 

Therefore am I thus lost in you, 

Just as vinegar is absorbed in honey; 

Or as a stone, which is changed into a pure ruby, 

Is filled with the bright light of the sun. 

In that stone its own properties abide not 

It is filled with the sun's properties altogether; 

So that, if afterwards it holds itself dear 



364 
The Masnavi 

'Tis the same as holding the sun dear, O beloved! 

And if it hold the sun dear in its heart, 

'Tis clearly the same as holding itself dear. 

Whether that pure ruby hold itself dear, 

Or hold the sun dear, 

There is no difference between the two preterences; 

On either hand is naught but the light of dawn. 

But till that stone becomes a ruby it hates itself 

For till it becomes one 'I,' it is two separate Ts,' 

For 'tis then darkened and purblind, 

And darkness is the essential enemy of light. 

If it then hold itself dear, it is an infidel; 

Because that self is an opponent of the mighty Sun. 

Wherefore 'tis unlawful for the stone then to say 'I, 

Because it is entirely in darkness and nothingness." 

Pharaoh said, "I am the Truth," and was laid low. 
Mansur Hallaj said, "I am the Truth," and escaped free. 
Pharaoh's "I" was followed by the curse of God; 
Mansur's "I" was followed by the mercy of God, O 

beloved! 
Because Pharaoh was a stone, Mansur a ruby; 
Pharaoh an enemy of light, Mansur a friend. 
O prattler, Mansur's "I am He" was a deep mystic 

saying, 
Expressing union with the light, not mere incarnation.' 



,6 



365 
Book Five 

Notes: 

1. All the latter part of this story is a parable of the last judge- 
ment. 

2. Koran lxxxvi. 5. 

3. Koran xviii. 48, and lv. 14. 

4. Koran xxxix. 61. 

5. Koran ii. 17. 

6. See Guishan i Raz, Answer vii. p. 45. Mansur Hallaj (wool- 
carder), the celebrated Sufi who was put to death at 
Baghdad in 309 (AH.) 

7. See Guishan i Raz, i. 454, and note. The doctrine of the 
descent of the Deity into man (Halul), or incarnation, is 
rejected both by Rumi and Shabistari in favor of the doc- 
trine of intimate union (Ittihad or Wahdat). 



STORY IX. The sincere repentance ofNasuh. 

Ayaz, in weighing the pros and cons in regard to pardon- 
ing the courtiers, remarks that professions of faith and pen- 
itence when contradicted by acts are worthless, according to 
the text, "If ye ask them who hath created the heavens and 
the earth, they will say 'God;' yet they devise lies." And in 
illustration of this he tells a story of a faithless husband who 
retired to a secret chamber ostensibly to say his prayers, but 



366 

The Masnavi 

really to carry on an intrigue with a slave-girl, and the falsi- 
ty of whose pretences was demonstrated by ocular proof of 
his condition. In like manner, on the day of resurrection 
man's hands and eyes and feet will bear witness against him 
of the evil actions done by him, thus confuting his pretences 
to piety. The test of a sincere repentance is abhorrence of 
past sins and utter abandonment of all pleasure in them, the 
old love for sin being superseded by the new love for holi- 
ness. Such a repentance was that of Nasuh. Nasuh in his 
youth disguised himself in female attire and obtained 
employment as attendant at the women's baths, where he 
used to carry on shameful intrigues with some of the 
women who frequented the bath. At last, however, his eyes 
were opened to the wickedness of his conduct, and be went 
to a holy man and besought him to pray for him. The holy 
man, imitating the long-suffering of the "Veiler of sins" did 
not so much as name his sin, but prayed, saying, "God give 
thee repentance of the sin thou knowest!" The prayer of that 
holy man was accepted, because the prayers of such an one 
are the same as God's own will, according to the tradition, 
"My servant draws nigh to me by pious works till I love 
him; and when I love him I am his ear, his eye, his tongue, 
his foot, his hand; and by me he hears, sees, talks, walks, 
and feels. "Nasuh then returned to the bath a truly repen- 
tant man; but soon afterwards one of the women frequent- 
ing the bath lost a valuable jewel, and the king gave order 
that all persons connected with the bath should be stripped 



367 
Book Five 

and searched. When the officers came to the bath to execute 
this order Nasuh was overwhelmed with fear, for he knew 
that if his sex were discovered he would certainly be put to 
death. In his fear he called upon God for deliverance, and 
swooned with fear and became beside himself, so that his 
natural self was annihilated, and he became a new creature, 
even as a corpse rising from the grave. When he came to 
himself he found that the lost jewel had been found, and 
those who had suspected him came and begged his pardon. 
Shortly afterwards the king's daughter sent for him to come 
and wash her head; but, in spite of her imperative com- 
mands, he refused to place himself again in the way of 
temptation, lest he might fall again, and God might "make 
easy to him the path to destruction." 

Man's members will bear witness against him on the day 
of judgement, and confute his claims to piety. 

On the resurrection day all secrets will be disclosed; 
Yea, every guilty one will be convicted by himself. 
Hand and foot will bear testimony openly 
Before the Almighty concerning their owner's sins. 
Hand will say, "I stole such and such things;" 
Lip will say, "I asked for such and such things." 
Foot will say, "I went after my own desires;" 
Arm will say, "I embraced the harlot." 
Eye will say, "I looked after forbidden things;" 



368 
The Masnavi 

Ear will say, "I listened to evil talk." 

Thus the man will be shown to be a liar from head to 

foot, 
Since his own members will prove him to be a liar. 

Notes: 

1 . Koran xxix. 6 1 . 

2. Koran xcii. 10. 



STORY X. The Lion, the Fox, and the Ass. 

As an instance of false and insincere repentance, a story is 
next told, which is also found in the fifth chapter of the 
Anwar i Suhaili. A lion had been wounded in fight with a 
male elephant, and was unable to hunt game for himself. In 
this strait he called a fox who was wont to attend upon him, 
and to live on the meat that was left from his repasts, just as 
disciples attending on a saint subsist on the heavenly food 
dropping from his lips. He called this fox, and bade him go 
and entice some animal to come near his lair, so that he 
might kill it and make a meal of it. The fox went and 
searched the neighborhood, and at last found a lean and 
hungry ass who was grazing in a stony place where there was 
little or no grass. The fox, after making due salutations, con- 
doled with the ass on his unfortunate condition; but the ass 



369 
Book Five 

replied that it was his divinely appointed lot, and that it 
would be impious to complain of the dispensations of 
Providence. He also instanced the case of the ass of a water- 
carrier, which, after having starved and worked hard in its 
master's service, by chance found admittance to the king's 
stables, where it was struck by the sleek appearance of the 
horses. But one day the horses were taken out to battle, and 
returned in a most miserable plight, some grievously wound- 
ed, and others dying. After seeing this sight it determined 
that its own hard life was preferable, and returned to its mas- 
ter. The fox replied that the ass was wrong in carrying pas- 
sive resignation to such an extent as to refuse to try to better 
his condition when the opportunity of doing so presented 
itself, because God says, "Go in quest of the bounties of 
God." He added, if the ass would come with him, he would 
take him to a delightful meadow, where he would never lack 
plenty of grass all the year round. The ass rejoined that the 
command to strive for sustenance was only issued on 
account of the weakness of man's faith. The fox replied that 
this exalted faith was only vouchsafed to a few great saints, 
because the Prophet describes contentment as a treasure, and 
treasure is not found by everyone. The ass rejoined that the 
fox was perverting the Scripture, as no pious man who trust- 
ed in God was ever forsaken. In illustration of this he told an 
anecdote of a devotee who determined to put the matter to 
the test, and went out into the desert, trusting only to God 
to supply his wants, and resolved to seek no aid of man, and 



370 
The Masnavi 

not to exert himself in any way to gain food. He lay down 
on a stone and went to sleep; and God sent a caravan of trav- 
elers that way, who found him, and forced him to take food 
in spite of himself. The fox again pressed the ass to try to bet- 
ter his condition, saying that God had given men hands to 
use and not to do anything with. The ass answered that he 
knew of no occupation and exertion better than trust in 
God, as worldly occupations often lead to ruin, according to 
the text, "Throw not yourselves with your own hands into 
ruin." But though the ass repeated all these excellent pre- 
cepts, yet it was only so much cant on his part, because he 
was not firmly rooted in. the faith. He had all the time a car- 
nal hankering after the pleasant grazing-ground the fox told 
him of, and the objections he made were only a parrot-like 
repetition of precepts heard, but not thoroughly understood 
and taken to heart. To illustrate the worthless nature of mere 
imitated religion and profession divorced from practice, a 
story is told of an infamous fellow who used to carry a dag- 
ger to protect as he said, his honor, though his every action 
showed that he had neither honor to protect nor manliness 
to protect it. The ass, though like Abraham, he had broken 
his idols, had not a sufficiently rooted faith to leap, like 
Abraham, into the fire, and thus prove his faith. (Here the 
poet apologizes for the trivial illustrations he uses by citing 
the text, "Verily God is not ashamed to set forth as well the 
instance of a gnat as of any nobler object" ). Finally the ass 
yielded to the fox's enticement, and accompanied him to the 



371 
Book Five 

lion's lair. The lion, being famished with hunger, sprang 
upon him the moment he appeared. Being, however, weak 
with sickness and fasting, he missed his aim, and the ass 
escaped with a slight wound. Then the fox blamed the lion 
for his precipitation, and the lion, after excusing himself as 
best he could, persuaded the fox to try to allure the ass a sec- 
ond time into his lair. The fox consented to try, observing 
that experience would probably have been thrown away on 
an ass, and his vows of repentance forgotten. Those who 
lapse from repentance, in forgetfulness of their former expe- 
rience, may be compared to the Jews changed into apes and 
swine by 'Isa. The fox was received by the ass with many 
reproaches for having deceived him; but he at last managed 
to persuade the ass that what he had seen was not a real lion, 
but only a harmless talisman; and the silly ass allowed him- 
self to be again deluded, and forgot his vows of repentance, 
and again followed the fox to the lion's lair, where he speed- 
ily met his doom. 

Men who make professions of holiness merely from 

blind imitation of others are detected and confuted by 

the opposition between their words and their deeds. 

A man asked a camel, saying, "Ho! whence comest thou, 

Thou beast of auspicious footstep?" 

He replied, " From the hot bath of thy street." 

The man said, " That is proved false by thy dirty legs!" 



372 
The Masnavi 

So, when stubborn Pharaoh saw Moses' staff a serpent, 
And begged for a delay (to fetch magicians) and relented, 
Wise men said, "He ought to have become harsher, 
If He really be, as He says, the Lord Supreme. 
What could miracles such as these of serpents, 
Or even dragons, matter to the majesty of His divinity? 
If He be really Lord Supreme, seated on His throne, 
What need has He to wheedle a worm like Moses?" 

O babbler, while thy soul is drunk with mere date wine, 

Thy spirit hath not tasted the genuine grapes. 

For the token of thy having seen that divine light 

Is this, to withdraw thyself from the house of pride. 

When a fowl flies to the salt water, 

It has never beheld the blessing of sweet water; 

But its faith is mere imitation of other fowl, 

And its soul has never seen the face of real faith. 

Wherefore the blind imitator encounters great perils, 

Perils of the road, of robbers, of cursed Satans. 

But when he has seen the light of God, he is safe 

From the agitation of doubt, and is firm in the faith. 

Till the foam has landed on the shore and dry land, 

Which is its home, it is ever tossed to and fro. 

'Tis at home on the land, but a stranger on the water. 

While it remains a stranger, it must be tossed about. 

When its eyes are opened, and it sees the vision of land, 



373 
Book Five 

Satan has no longer any domination over it. 

Although the ass repeated verities to the fox, 

He spoke them idly and in the way of cant. 

He praised the water, but was not eager to drink; 

He rent his garments and his hair, but was no real lover. 

The excuse of a hypocrite is rejected, not approved, 

Because it comes only from the lips, not from the heart. 

He has the scent of the apple, but not a piece of it, 

And the scent only for the purpose of misleading others. 

Thus a woman's onset in the midst of a battle array, 

She keeps in line, and forms part of the battle array, 

Yet, though she looks a very lion as she stands in line, 

Her hand begins to tremble as soon as she takes a sword. 

Woe to him whose reason is like a woman 

While his lust is like a resolute man! 

Of a certainty his reason will be worsted in the fight, 

And his imitation of a man will only lead him to ruin. 

Happy is he whose reason is masculine, 

And his ugly lust feminine and under subjection! 

Though the mere imitator quotes a hundred proofs, 
They are all based on opinion, not on conviction. 
He is only scented with musk, he is not himself musk; 
He smells of musk, but is really naught but dung. 
For his dung to become musk, O disciple, 
He must graze year after year in the divine pasture. 



374 
The Masnavi 

For he who, like the musk-deer, feeds on saffron of 

Khoten 
Must not eat grass and oats like asses. 

That man of cant has at his tongue's end 

A hundred proofs and precepts, but there is no life in him. 

When the preacher has himself no light or life, 

How can his words yield leaves and fruit? 

He impudently preaches to others to walk aright, 

While himself He is unsteady as a reed shaken by wind. 

Thus, though his preaching is very eloquent, 

It hides within it unsteadiness in the faith. 

In order to gain true wisdom man 
must shake off worldly illusions. 

The fox said, "In my pure wine there are no dregs; 

These vain suspicions are not becoming. 

All this is only baseless suspicion, O simple one, 

Else you would know I am not plotting against you. 

You repudiate me on account of your own bad fancies; 

Why do you thus suspect your true friends? 

Think well of the 'Brothers of purity,' 

Even though they show harshness toward you; 

For when evil suspicion takes hold of you, 

It severs you from hundreds of friends. 



375 
Book Five 

If a tender friend treats you roughly to try you, 

'Tis contrary to reason to distrust him. 

Though I bear a bad name, my nature is not malevolent; 

What you saw was not dangerous, it was only a talisman. 

But even if there were danger in that object of suspicion, 

Friends always pardon an offence." 

This world of illusions, fancies, desires, and fears, 
Is a mighty obstacle in the traveler's path. 
Thus, when these forms of delusive imaginations 
Misled Abraham, who was a very mountain of wisdom, 
He said of the star, " This is my Lord," 
Having fallen into the midst of the world of illusion. 
He thus interpreted the meaning of sun and stars, 
Yea, he, that great man who threaded jewels of interpreta- 
tion, 
Seeing then that this world of eye-fascinating illusion 
Seduced from the right path such a mountain as Abraham, 
So that he said of the star, "This is my Lord," 
What will not its illusions effect on a stupid ass? 
Human reason is drowned, like the high mountains, 
in the flood of illusion and vain imaginations. 
The very mountains are overwhelmed by this flood, 
Where is safety to be found save in Noahs ark? 
By illusions that plunder the road of faith 
The faithful have been split into seventy-two sects. 



376 
The Masnavi 

But the man of conviction escapes illusion; 

He does not mistake his eyelash for the new moon. 

He who is divorced from 'Omar's light 

Is deceived by his own crooked eyelash. 

Thousands of ships, in all their majesty and pomp, 

Have gone to pieces in this sea of illusion. 

Then follows an anecdote of Shaikh Muhammad of 
Ghazni, who was named "Sar i Razi," because he used to 
take only a vine-leaf to break his fast. He dwelt a long time 
in the desert, and was there miraculously preserved from 
death, and directed by divine intimation to proceed to 
Ghazni, and beg money of the rich and distribute it to the 
poor. After he had done this some time a second intimation 
came to him to beg no longer, as the money for his charities 
would be supplied to him miraculously. He at last attained 
to such a degree of spiritual insight that he knew the wants 
of those who came to him for aid before they uttered them. 
He said the reason of this preternatural discernment was, 
that he had purified his heart of all but the love of God, and 
thus, whenever thoughts of anything besides God occurred 
to his mind, he knew they did not appertain to him, but 
must have been in some way suggested to him by the per- 
son asking aid of him. 

Then follow some reflections on the power of fasting and 
abstinence to subdue the carnal lusts which lead man to 



377 
Book Five 

destruction; and two short anecdotes to illustrate the thesis 
that God never fails to provide sustenance for those who 
take no thought for the morrow, but place absolute trust in 
Him. 

The fate of the ass then suggests to the poet another train 
of reflections. After the lion had slain the ass, he went to the 
river to quench his thirst, telling the fox to watch the dead 
body till he returned; but the moment the lion's back was 
turned the fox ate up the heart and liver, which are the dain- 
tiest parts. When the lion returned and inquired for them, 
the fox assured him that the ass had possessed neither a 
heart nor a liver, for if he had he would never have shown 
himself so stupid. Men without understanding are not real- 
ly men at all, but only simulacra or forms of men. For lack 
of understanding many will cry in the world to come, "Had 
we but hearkened or understood, we had not been among 
the dwellers in the flame" Then follows a story of a monk 
(Diogenes) who took a lantern and searched all through a 
bazaar crowded with men to find, as he said, a man. 

The monk's search for a man. 

The monk said, "I am searching everywhere for a man 
Who lives by the life of the breath of God." 
The other said, "Here are men; the bazaar is full; 
These are surely men, O enlightened sage!" 



378 
The Masnavi 

The monk said, "I seek a man who walks straight 

As well in the road of anger as in that of lust. 

Where is one who shows himself a man in anger and lust? 

In search of such a one I run from street to street. 

If there be one who is a true man in these two states, 

I will yield up my life for him this day!" 

The other, who was a fatalist, said, "What you seek is rare. 

But you are ignorant of the force of the divine decree; 

You see the branches, but ignore the root. 

We men are but branches, God's eternal decree the root. 

That decree turns from its course the revolving sky, 

And makes foolish hundreds of planets like Mercury. 

It reduces to helplessness the world of devices; 

It turns steel and stone to water. 

you who attribute stability to these steps on the road, 
You are one of the raw ones; yea, raw, raw! 

When you have seen the millstone turning round, 
Then, prithee, go and see the stream that turns it. 
When you have seen the dust rising up into the air, 
Go and mark the air in the midst of the dust. 
You see the kettles of thought boiling over, 
Look with intelligence at the fire beneath them. 
God said to Job, 'Out of my clemency 

1 have given a grain of patience to every hair of thine.' 
Look not, then, so much at your own patience; 
After seeing patience, look to the Giver of patience. 



379 
Book Five 

How long will you confine your view to the waterwheel? 
Lift up your head and view also the water." 

Notes: 

1. Koran lxii. 10. 

2. Koran ii. 191. 

3. Koran ii. 24. 

4. Koran v. 65. 

5. Koran xx. 25. 

6. Koran xxviii. 38. 

7. A society at Basra, who wrote, about 980 AD., an 
encyclopedia of philosophy (trans, by Dieterici). 

8. Koran vi. 76. 

9. Alluding to the first anecdote in Book II. 

10. Koran lxxvii. 10. 



STORY XL The Mosalman who tried to convert a Magian. 

A Mosalman pressed a Magian to embrace the true faith. 
The Magian replied, "If God wills it, no doubt I shall do 
so." The Mosalman replied, "God certainly wills it, that 
your soul may be saved from hell; but your own evil lusts 
and the Devil hold you back." The Magian retorted, using 
the arguments of the Jabriyan or "Compulsionists," that on 



380 
The Masnavi 

earth God is sole sovereign, and that Satan and lust exist 
and act only in furtherance of God's will. To hold that God 
is pulling men one way and Satan another is to derogate 
from God's sovereignty. Man cannot help moving in the 
direction he is most strongly impelled to go; if he is 
impelled wrongly he is no more to blame than a building 
designed for a mosque but degraded into a fire-temple, or 
a piece of cloth designed for a coat but altered into a pair 
of trousers. The truth is, that whatever occurs is according 
to God's will, and Satan himself is only one of His agents. 
Satan resembles the Turkoman's dog who sits at the door of 
the tent, and is" vehement against aliens, but full of ten- 
derness to friends." The Mosalman then replied with the 
arguments of the Qadarians and Mutazilites, to prove the 
freedom of the will and consequent responsibility of man 
for his actions. He urged that man's free agency and conse- 
quent responsibility are recognized in common parlance, as 
when we order a man to act in a certain way,-that God 
expressly assumes man to be a free agent by addressing 
commands and prohibitions to him, and by specially 
exempting some, such as the blind, from responsibility for 
certain acts, that our internal consciousness assures us of 
our power of choice, just as outward sense assures us of 
properties in material objects, and that it is just as sophis- 
tical to disbelieve the declarations of the interior con- 
sciousness, as those of the outward senses as to the reality 



381 
Book Five 

of the material world. He then told an anecdote of a man 
caught robbing a garden and defending himself with the 
fatalist plea of irresponsibility, to whom the owner of the 
garden replied by administering a very severe beating, and 
assuring him that this beating was also predestined, and 
that he therefore could not help administering it. He con- 
cluded his argument by repeating that the traditions, 
"Whatever God wills is," and "The pen is dry, and alters 
not its writing," are not inconsistent with the existence of 
freewill in man. They are not intended to reduce good 
action and evil to the same level, but good actions will 
always entail good consequences, and bad actions the 
reverse. A devotee admired the splendid apparel of the 
slaves of the Chief of Herat, and cried to Heaven, "Ah! 
learn from this Chief how to treat faithful slaves!" Shortly 
after the Chief was deposed, and his slaves were put to the 
torture to make them reveal where the Chief had hidden 
his treasure, but not one would betray the secret. Then a 
voice from heaven came to the devotee, saying, "Learn 
from them how to be a faithful slave, and then look for rec- 
ompense." The Magian, unconvinced by the arguments of 
the Mosalman, again plied him with "Compulsionist" 
arguments, and the discussion was protracted, with the 
usual result of leaving both the disputants of the same 
opinion as when they began. The poet remarks that the 
contest of the "Compulsionists" and the advocates of man's 



382 
The Masnavi 

free agency will endure till the day of judgment; for noth- 
ing can resolve these difficulties but the true love which is 
"a gift imparted by God to whom He will." 

Love puts reason to silence. 

Love is a perfect muzzle of evil suggestions; 
Without love who ever succeeded in stopping them? 
Be a lover, and seek that fair Beauty, 
Hunt for that Waterfowl in every stream! 
How can you get water from that which cuts it off? 
How gain understanding from what destroys understand- 
ing? 
Apart from principles of reason are other principles 
Of light and great price to be gained by love of God. 
Besides this reason of yours God has other reasons 
Which will procure for you heavenly nourishment. 
By your carnal reason you may procure earthly food, 
By God-given reason you may mount the heavens. 
When, to win enduring love of God, you sacrifice reason, 
God gives you "a tenfold recompense;" yea, seven hun- 
dred fold. 
When those Egyptian women sacrificed their reason, 
They penetrated the mansion of Joseph's love; 
The Cup-bearer of life bore away their reason, 
They were filled with wisdom of the world without end. 



383 
Book Five 

Joseph's beauty was only an offshoot of God's beauty; 
Be lost, then, in God's beauty more than those women. 

Love of God cuts short reasoning, O beloved, 

For it is a present refuge from perplexities. 

Through love bewilderment befalls the power of speech, 

It no longer dares to utter what passes; 

For if it sets forth an answer, it fears greatly 

That its secret treasure may escape its lips. 

Therefore it closes lips from saying good or bad, 

So that its treasure may not escape it. 

In like manner the Prophet's companions tell us 

"When the Prophet used to tell us deep sayings, 

That chosen one, while scattering pearls of speech, 

Would bid us preserve perfect quiet and silence." 

So, when the mighty phoenix hovers over your head, 
Causing your soul to tremble at the motion of its wings, 
You venture not to stir from your place, 
Lest that bird of good fortune should take wing. 
You hold your breath and repress your coughs, 
So as not to scare that phoenix into flying away. 
And if one say a word to you, whether good or bad, 
You place finger on lip, as much as to say, "Be silent." 
That phoenix is bewilderment, it makes you silent; 
The kettle is silent, though it is boiling all the while. 



384 
The Masnavi 

Notes: 

1 . Note the true believer is here represented as using the argu- 
ments of the Qadarians or Mutazilites for free will, as 
against the Jabriyan or fatalist argument put into the mouth 
of the Magian. 

2. Koran xlviii. 29. 

3. Koran xxiv. 60. 

4. The Prophet said, "Sit not with a disputer about fate, nor 
converse with him." 

5. Koran iii. 66. 

6. Koran vi. 161. 

7. "And when they saw him they were amazed at him, and cut 
their hands" (Koran xii. 31). 

8. It is supposed to bring good fortune. 

9. Bewilderment is the "truly mystical darkness of ignorance" 
which falls upon the mystic when the light of absolute Being 
draws near to him, and "blinds him with excess of light." 
See Gulshan i Raz, p. 33, and notes. 



STORY XII. The Devotee who broke the noble's wine-jar. 

A certain noble, who lived under the Christian dispensa- 
tion when wine was allowed, sent his servant to a monastery 
to fetch some wine. The servant went and bought the wine, 
and was returning with it, when he passed the house of a 



385 
Book Five 

very austere and testy devotee. This devotee called out to 
him, "What have you got there?" The servant said, "Wine, 
belonging to such a noble." The devotee said, "What! does a 
follower of God indulge in wine? Followers of God should 
have naught to do with pleasure and drinking; for wine is a 
very Satan, and steals men's wits. Your wits are not too bright 
already, so you have no need to render them still duller by 
drink." In illustration of this, he told the story of one Ziayi 
Dalaq, a very tall man, who had a dwarfish brother. This 
brother one day received him very ungraciously, only half 
rising from his seat in answer to his salutation, and Ziayi 
Dalaq said to him, "You seem to think yourself so tall that it 
is necessary to clip off somewhat of your height." Finally the 
devotee broke the wine-jar with a stone, and the servant 
went and told his master. The noble was very wrathful at the 
presumption of the devotee in taking upon himself to pro- 
hibit wine, as condemned by the law of nature, when it had 
not been prohibited by the Gospel, and he took a thick stick 
and went to the devotee's house to chastise him. The devo- 
tee heard of his approach and hid himself under some wool, 
which belonged to the ropemakers of the village, He said to 
himself, "To tell an angry man of his faults one needs to have 
a face as hard as a mirror, which reflects his ugliness without 
fear or favor." Just so the Prince of Tirmid was once playing 
chess with a courtier, and being checkmated, got into a rage 
and threw the chessboard at his courtier's head. So before 
playing the next game the courtier protected his head by 



386 
The Masnavi 

wrappings of felt. Then the neighbors of the devotee, hear- 
ing the noise, came out and interceded for him with the 
noble, telling him that the devotee was half-witted, and 
could not be held responsible for his actions; and moreover, 
that as he was a favorite of God, it was useless to attempt to 
slay him before his time, for the Prophet and other saints 
had been miraculously preserved in circumstances fatal to 
ordinary persons. The noble refused to be pacified; but the 
neighbors redoubled their entreaties, urging that he had so 
much pleasure in his sovereignty that he could well dispense 
with the pleasure of wine. The noble strenuously denied this, 
saying that no other pleasure of sovereignty, or what not, 
could compensate him for the loss of wine, which made him 
sway from side to side like the jessamine. The prophets 
themselves had rejected all other pleasures for that of spiri- 
tual intoxication, and he who has once embraced a living 
mistress will never put up with a dead one. The moral is, that 
spiritual pleasures, typified by wine, are not to be bartered 
away for earthly pleasures. The Prophet said, "The world is 
carrion, and they who seek it are dogs;" and the Koran says, 
"The present life is no other than a pastime and a sport; but 
the future mansion is life indeed." 

Description of a devotee who trusted to the light of nature. 

His brain is dried up; and as for his reason, 
It is now less than that of a child. 



387 
Book Five 

Age and abstinence have added infirmity to infirmity, 

And his abstinence has yielded him no rejoicing. 

He has endured toils, but gained no reward from his Friend; 

He has done the work, but has not been paid. 

Either his work has lacked value, 

Or the time of recompense is not decreed as yet. 

Either his works are as the works of the Jews, 

Or his reward is held back till the appointed time. 

This grief and sorrow are enough for him, 

That in this valley of pain he is utterly friendless. 

With sad eyes he sits in his corner, 

With frowning face and downcast looks. 

There is no oculist who cares to open his eyes, 

Nor has he reason enough to discover the eye-salve. 

He strives earnestly with firm resolve and in hope, 

His work is done on the chance of being right. 

The vision of "The Friend" is far from his course, 

For he loses the kernel in his love for the shell. 

Notes: 

1 . Half-witted persons are supposed to be divinely protected. 

2. Koran xxix. 64. 

3. "But as to the infidels, their works are like the mirage in the 
desert" (Koran xxiv. 39). 

4. I.e., he has no director (Murshid i kamil) to instruct him in 
the right course. 



388 
The Masnavi 

STORY VIII. (continued). Mabmud and Ayaz. 

The poet now returns to the story of Mahmud and Ayaz, 
which is continued at intervals till the end of the book. The 
king inquired of Ayaz what made him continually visit his 
old shoes and garments, as Majnun used to visit his Laila, 
or as a Christian regularly visits his priest to obtain absolu- 
tion for his sins. Why should he call to these dead things, 
like a fond mother calling to her dead infant, were it not 
that faith and love made them, as it were, living beings to 
him? The eye sees what it brings with it to see; it can see 
nothing but what it has gained the faculty of seeing. Thus 
the face of Laila, which seemed so lovely to the eyes of 
Majnun, made clairvoyant by love, seemed to strangers to 
have no claims to beauty. The earthly forms which here sur- 
round us are, as it were, vessels fraught with spiritual wine, 
only visible to those who have learnt to discern the deep 
things of the Spirit. 

Love and faith are a mighty spell. 

O Ayaz, what is this love of yours for your old shoes, 
Which resembles the love of a lover for his mistress? 
You have made these old shoes your object of devotion, 
Just as Majnun made an idol of his Laila! 
You have bound the affection of your soul to them, 



389 
Book Five 

And hung them up in your secret chamber. 

How long will you say orisons to this old pair of shoes? 

And breathe your oft-told secrets into inanimate ears? 

Like the Arab lover to the house of his dead mistress, 

You address to them long invocations of love. 

Of what great Asaf were your shoes the house? 

Is your old garment, think you, the coat of Yusuf? 

Like a Christian who confesses to a priest 

His past year's sins of fornication, fraud, and deceit; 

In order that the priest may absolve him of those sins; 

He thinks the priest's absolution the same as God's! 

That priest is unable to condemn or to absolve; 

But faith and love are a mighty enchantment! 

God's dealings visible to the spiritual. 

The wine is from that world, the vessels from this; 

The vessels are seen, but the wine is hidden! 

Hidden indeed from the sight of the carnal, 

But open and manifest to the spiritual! 

O God, our eyes are blinded! 

O pardon us, our sins are a heavy burden! 

Thou art hidden from us, though the heavens are filled 

With Thy light, which is brighter than sun and moon! 

Thou art hidden, yet revealest our hidden secrets! 

Thou art the source that causes our rivers to flow. 



390 
The Masnavi 

Thou art hidden in Thy essence, but seen by Thy bounties. 

Thou art like the water, and we like the millstone. 

Thou art like the wind, and we like the dust; 

The wind is unseen, but the dust is seen by all. 

Thou art the spring, and we the sweet green garden; 

Spring is not seen, though its gifts are seen. 

Thou art as the soul, we as hand and foot; 

Soul instructs hand and foot to hold and take. 

Thou art as reason, we like the tongue; 

'Tis reason that teaches the tongue to speak. 

Thou art as joy, and we are laughing; 

The laughter is the consequence of the joy. 

Our every motion every moment testifies, 

For it proves the presence of the Everlasting God. 

So the revolution of the millstone, so violent, 

Testifies to the existence of a stream of water. 

O Thou who art above our conceptions and descriptions, 

Dust be on our heads, and upon our similitudes of Thee! 

Yet Thy slaves never cease devising images of Thee; 

They cry to Thee always, "My life is Thy footstool!" 

Like that shepherd who cried," O Lord! 

Come nigh to thy faithful shepherd, 

That he may cleanse thy garment of vermin, 

And mend thy shoes, and kiss the hem of thy robe!" 

No one equaled that shepherd in love and devotion, 

Though his manner of expressing it was most faulty. 



391 
Book Five 

His love pitched its tent on the heavens, 

He himself was as the dog at the tent-door. 

When the sea of love to God boiled up, 

It touched his heart, but it touches your ears only. 

The thesis that silence may indicate emotions too deep 
for expression, while eloquent expressions may indicate that 
the ears only, and not the heart, have been touched, is next 
illustrated by a ludicrous anecdote of a dwarf who disguised 
himself as a woman, and presented himself at a sermon 
addressed to women. This dwarf played a trick on a woman 
sitting next him, which made her cry out, and the preacher 
fancied that his sermon had touched her heart; but the 
dwarf said that if her heart had been touched she would not 
have betrayed her feelings by publishing them to the whole 
congregation. 

The king then again pressed Ayaz to explain the mystery 
of his regard for the old shoes and rags, in order to admon- 
ish the courtiers, for he said that the beauty of true holiness 
is such that it attracts even infidels. To illustrate this he told 
an anecdote of a Mosalman who tried to convert a Gueber 
in the time of Bayazid. The Gueber said that he admired 
and envied the faith of Bayazid, though he had no power to 
imitate it; but as for the faith of the missionary who was try- 
ing to convert him, it only inspired him with aversion, 
because it was plainly insincere and hypocritical. And he 



392 
The Masnavi 

told an anecdote of a harsh-voiced Mu'azzin who went into 
a heathen country and there uttered the call to prayer. It 
happened that there was a girl in that place who had long 
been inclined to embrace Islam, much to the grief of her 
parents; but when she heard this harsh call she was at once 
cured of her wish to forsake her own religion. Her father 
was so delighted at this that he ran out and loaded the 
Mu'azzin with gifts. The Gueber said the missionary had 
cured him of the wish to embrace Islam, just as the girl was 
cured by the Mu'azzin's harsh voice. But he said he still 
retained his reverence for the faith of Bayazid, though he 
failed to understand how so much spirituality as was seen in 
Bayazid could be contained in an earthly body. He gave a 
curious illustration of his meaning. A man brought home a 
piece of meat weighing over half a man, to provide a meal 
for a guest; but his wife, who was very greedy, ate it all up 
secretly. When the man missed his meat he asked his wife 
for it, and she said the cat had eaten it. The man took the 
cat and weighed her, and found she weighed only half a 
man. Then he said to his wife, "If this half-man is all cat, 
where is the meat? and if it is meat, where is the cat?" The 
Gueber said this was exactly the difficulty he felt about the 
spirit and the body of Bayazid. He concluded by saying, in 
the words of the Hadis, "The true believer is attached to 
others, and others are attached to him, but the hypocrite 
inspires affection in no one. 



393 
Book Five 

Mahmud and Ayaz. (continued). 

Mahmud again presses Ayaz to reveal his secrets, remark- 
ing that even if they suggest sad thoughts, they will benefit 
the hearers. The wise man is as a guest-house, and he admits 
all the thoughts that occur to him, whether of joy or of sor- 
row, with the same welcome, knowing that, like Abraham, 
he may entertain angels unawares. This is illustrated by the 
story of a woman who drove away a valued guest by a petu- 
lant remark, which he was not intended to hear, and after- 
wards repented her discourtesy so deeply that she put on 
mourning and turned her house into an inn. Let grief as 
well as joy lodge in the heart, for grief is sent for our benefit 
as well as joy. Endure woe patiently, like Joseph and Job, 
and regard it as a blessing, saying with Solomon, "Stir me 
up, O Lord, to be thankful for Thy favor which Thou hast 
showed upon me!" Mahmud then praises Ayaz for being a 
true man who can control both lust and anger. Those who 
are carried away by anger or lust, like the girl of whom an 
anecdote is told, do not deserve the name of men. When 
anger or lust takes hold of a man reason departs from him. 
Then comes an anecdote of a cowardly Sufi who boasted of 
his bravery, but had not courage enough even to slay a cap- 
tive infidel. Verily, the "greater warfare," viz., that against 
one's own lusts and passions, demands as much courage as 
the "lesser warfare" against the infidels. This is illustrated by 
a story of a saint named Iyazi, who, after having been a great 



394 
The Masnavi 

warrior against the infidels, renounced the world and 
applied himself to wage the "greater warfare" against his 
own lusts. One day, while sitting in his cell, he heard the 
noise of the army going out to fight, and his carnal passion 
urged him to go and join in the fight, but he thus rebuked 
it: 

Iyazi's rebuke to his passion, whish lusted 
to join in the "lesser warfare". 

I said, "O foul and faithless passion, 

Whence have you derived this inclination to war? 

Tell me truly, O passion, is this your trickery? 

Or else is it stubbornness shunning obedience to God? 

If you say not truly I will attack you, 

And will afflict you more severely with discipline." 

Passion then heaved a cry from its breast, 

And without mouth vented the following complaints: 

"In this cell you slay me every day; 

You slay my life like the life of a Gueber. 

Not a soul is aware of my condition; 

You drag me along without food or sleep. 

In the fight with one wound I shall quit the body, 

And the people will admire my valor and self-devotion." 

I said, "O bad passion, you live as an infidel, 

And as an infidel you will die; shame be upon you! 

In both worlds you are naught but a hypocrite; 



395 
Book Five 

In the two worlds only an unprofitable servant. 

I have vowed to God never to quit this cell 

While life remains in this body; 

Because whatever the body does in this privacy 

Is not done to make a fair show before men. 

Its movements and its rest in the privacy of this cell 

Are not intended for the sight of any besides God. 

This is the 'greater warfare,' that the 'lesser;' 

Both these warfares have their Rustams and Haidars. 

They are not to be fought by one whose reason and sense 

Flee away as soon as a mouse wags its tail. 

Such persons must shun the array of battle, 

And keep aloof from it even as women do." 

This is followed by an anecdote of another brave warrior 
who "was among the faithful, and made good what he had 
promised to God." Then comes a long story of a prince of 
Egypt who saw the portrait of a damsel belonging to the 
Chief of Mausil, and conceived an ardent passion for her, 
and sent an army to take her by force. The army succeeded 
in capturing her, and set out on the return march; but on 
the way the captain of the army fell in love with the damsel, 
and she returned his affection. When they reached Egypt 
she was made over to the prince, but at once took a dislike 
to him, as he was not nearly so manly as her beloved cap- 
tain. The prince discovered her secret, and though he might 
justly have resented the treachery of the captain, he 



396 
The Masnavi 

refrained, and showed true manliness in the "greater war- 
fare" by pardoning his fault and uniting him with the 
damsel to whom he was so much attached. 

Ideas gained from hearing a thing lead to seeing it. 

A person put this question to a philosopher, 
"O sage, what is true and what is false?" 
The sage touched his ear and said, "This is false, 
But the eye is true and its report is certain." 

The ear is false in relation to the eye, 

And most assertions are related to the ear. 

If a bat turn away its eyes from the sun, 

Still it is not veiled from some idea of the sun; 

Its very dread of the sun frames an idea of the sun, 

And that idea scares it away to the darkness. 

That idea of light terrifies it, 

And makes it cling to the murky night. 

Just so 'tis your idea of your terrible foe 

Which makes you cling to your friends and allies. 

O Moses, thy revelations shed glory on the mount, 

But that frightened one endured not thy realities. 

Be not too proud, but know that you must first endure 

The idea of the Truth, and thence come to the reality. 

No one is frightened by the mere idea of fighting, 



397 
Book Five 



For "no courage is needed before fighting begins." 
In the mere idea of fighting a coward can imagine 
Himself as attacking and retreating like Rustam. 
The pictures of Rustam on the wall of a bath 
Are similar to a coward's ideas of fighting. 
But when these ideas are tested by actual sight, 
What of the coward then? His bravery is gone! 



7 



Strive, then, from mere hearing to press on to seeing; 
What ear has told you falsely eye will tell truly. 
Then ear too will acquire the properties of an eye; 
Your ears, now worthless as wool, will become gems; 
Yea, your whole body will become a mirror, 
It will be as an eye or a bright gem in your bosom. 
First the hearing of the ear enables you to form ideas, 
Then these ideas guide you to the Beloved. 
Strive, then, to increase the number of these ideas, 
That they may guide you, like Majnun, to the Beloved. 

Concerning the unbelievers who say, "There is only 

this our present life; we live and we die, 

and naught but time destroyeth us. " 

To return; that prince played the fool, 

And took delight in the society of the damsel. 

O prince, suppose your dominion extend from east to west, 



398 
The Masnavi 

Yet, as it endures not, esteem it transitory as lightning 

Yea, O sleeping heart, know the kingdom that endures not 

Forever and ever is only a mere dream. 

I marvel how long you will indulge in vain illusion, 

Which has seized you by the throat like a headsman. 

Know that even in this world there is a place of refuge; 

Hearken not to the unbeliever who denies it. 

His argument is this: he says again and again, 

"If there were aught beyond this life we should see it." 

But if the child sees not the state of reason, 

Does the man of reason therefore forsake reason? 

And if the man of reason sees not the state of love, 

Is the blessed moon of love thereby eclipsed? 

The beauty of Joseph was not visible to his brethren; 

Was it therefore hidden from the eyes of Jacob? 

The eyes of Moses regarded his staff as a stick, 

But the divine eye saw it to be a deadly serpent. 

The eye of the head was at issue with the divine eye, 

But the latter prevailed and gave convincing proof. 

To the eyes of Moses his hand looked a mere hand, 

But to the divine eye it appeared a flashing light. 

This subject in its entirety is endless, 

But to the unbeliever it is a mere fanciful idea. 

The only realities to him are lust and gluttony; 

Speak not then to him of the mysteries of the Beloved. 

To us believers lust and gluttony are only ideas, 



399 
Book Five 

Therefore we behold always the beauty of the Beloved. 
To all men whose creed is lust and gluttony, 
Applies the text, "To you be your creed, to me mine." 
In the face of negations like these cut short speech, 
"O Ahmad, say little to an old Fire-worshipper!" 

"We distribute among them, " to some carnal lusts, and to 
others angelic qualities. 

If the prince lacked the animal manliness of asses, 

Yet he possessed the true manliness of the prophets. 

He renounced lust and anger and concupiscence, 

And showed himself a man of the lineage of the prophets. 

Grant that he lacked the virility of asses, 

Yet God esteemed him a lord of lords. 

Let me be dead, so long as God regards me with favor! 

I am better off than the living who are rejected of God; 

The former is the kernel of manliness, the latter only the 

rind; 
The former is borne to Paradise, the latter to hell. 
The Prophet says, "Paradise is annexed to tribulation, 

12 

But hell-fire follows indulgence in lust." 
O Ayaz, who slayest demons like a male lion, 
Manliness of asses is naught, manliness of mind much. 
What sort of man dost thou think him who sports as a 
boy, 



400 
The Masnavi 

But who has no comprehension of these chief matters? 
o thou who hast seen the delight of my connnandments, 
And risked thy life to perform them faithfully, 
Hear a tale of the sweetness of my commandments, 
That the meaning of this sweetness may be made plain. 

The story which follows is one in which Ayaz is himself 
the chief actor, and hence it may perhaps be inferred that 
this part of the poem had not received its final revision 
when the poet died. The king showed to all his courtiers in 
turn a valuable jewel, and asked them its value. Each 
declared it to be priceless. He thereupon ordered each of 
them to break it to pieces, but they refused, one after the 
other; on which he praised them highly and gave them pre- 
sents. Finally the jewel came into the hands of Ayaz, and he, 
not being a mere imitator like the rest, nor being tempted 
by the rewards given to the rest, decided that the king's 
command ought to be obeyed at all costs, and therefore 
broke the jewel to pieces. Blind imitation of current fash- 
ions and ruling "public opinion" is the way of the world, 
but its worthlessness is at once manifested when it is put to 
the test. True faith is a reasonable faith, not one adopted 
and held in mechanical and parrot-like fashion. The king 
then commanded that those courtiers whose faith had been 
shown to be mere "taqlid" or imitation, and not vital and 
intelligent, should be put to death; but Ayaz interceded for 



401 
Book Five 

them, saying, "O Lord, punish them not if they forget or 
fall into sin;" although their plea that they sinned through 
forgetfulness is of no more weight than the plea of having 
sinned through drunkenness, seeing that both forgetfulness 
and drunkenness are willfully incurred. Those who die in 
amity with God have no cause to fear death, "It cannot 
harm them, for to their Lord will they return;" but those 
who die at enmity with God are in a very different position, 
and have therefore a very strong claim for mercy. The 
Egyptian magicians, when threatened by Pharaoh with 
death for believing in Moses, recognized the truth that 
death in such a cause would unite them with God, and that 
extinction of the phenomenal self, on which Pharaoh prid- 
ed himself, would bring them to the real Self from whom 
they had been estranged by life on earth. Like Habib, the 
carpenter of Antioch, who was martyred for taking the part 
of 'Isa's two apostles in that city, they said, "O that my peo- 
ple knew how gracious God hath been to me, and that He 
hath made me one of His honored ones!" A man can only 
say "I" with truth when he has mortified self and unlearnt 
to say "I" in the sense in which Pharaoh said it. Fakhru-'d- 
Din Razi discoursed learnedly on this point, saying much 
of "incarnation" and "union" as the modes in which the real 
"I" of the Deity indwells in the human soul; but as he 
lacked the true mystic unction, his words only serve to 
darken counsel. But here Ayaz breaks off; saying, "Who 



402 
The Masnavi 

am I that I should say to the Almighty, 'Grant pardon to 
these offenders'?" The Omniscient God needs not to be 
informed of their case, for He knows all; nor to be remind- 
ed of it, for He forgets nothing; nor to be urged to act mer- 
cifully, for He created men "for their own benefit, and not 
to derive benefit from them." Such intercession, therefore, 
implies ignorance of God, and "such only of His servants as 
are possessed of knowledge of God truly fear God." 18 God 
is at once center and circumference of the universe, and the 
only true wisdom consists in absolute self-surrender to His 
will, and this surrender of self will bring with it its own 
exceeding great reward. 

Notes: 

1. Alluding to Story vii. Book II. 

2. Koran xxvii. 19. 

3. Koran xxxiii. 23. 

4. i.e., are based on hearsay. 

5. "When God manifested Himself to the mount He turned it 
to dust, and Moses fell in a swoon" (Koran vii. 139). As the 
bat cannot endure the sight of the sun, men cannot at once 
endure the full blaze of the beatific vision. 

6. A proverb which is not given by Freytag. 

7. Ideas and types lead men on to actual sight when they are 
strong enough to bear it. Job xlii. 5. 



403 
Book Five 

8. Koran xlv. 23. 

9. Place of refuge, i.e., heavenly visions; a foretaste of the world 
to come (Gulshan i Raz, I. 679). 

10. Koran cix. 6. 

11. Koran xliii. 31. 

12. Cp. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, vol ii. p. 165. 

13. Koran ii. 286. 

14. Koran xxvi. 50. 

15. Koran xxxvi. 25. 

16. A great theologian of Khorasan who lived from A.D. 1150 
to 1210. De Slane's Ibn Khallikan, ii. 652. 

17. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 453, note. 

18. Koran xxxv. 25. 



THE SPIRITUAL COUPLETS 

OF 

MAULANA JALALU-'D-DIN MUHAMMAD RUMI 



Book VI. 

PROLOGUE. 

O LIFE of the heart, Husamu-'d-Din, 

My zeal burnt within me to write this sixth part! 

The Masnavi became a standard through thy influence, 

Thy sword (Husam) has made it an exemplar to the world 

O spiritual one, I now offer it to thee, 

This sixth part of the entire Masnavi. 

Enlighten the world's six sides with its six parts, 

That it may illuminate him who is not illuminated! 

Love has naught to do with five senses or six sides, 

Its only aim is to be attracted to the Beloved! 

But haply leave may be given me hereafter 

To tell those mysteries so far as they can be told, 

In a discourse more closely approximating to the facts 

Than these faint indications of those abstruse matters. 

Mysteries are not communicable, save to those who know; 

Mystery in the ear of infidels is no mystery. 

Nevertheless, this is a call to you from God; 

It matters not to Him whether ye accept or reject it. 

Noah repeated His call for nine hundred years, 

But his people only increased in rebellion. 

Never did he draw back from admonishing them, 



406 
The Masnavi 

Never did he retire into the cave of silence. 

He said, "At the barking and howling of the dogs 

No caravan ever turned back in its road. 

Nor does the full moon on a bright night cease shining 

Because of the howling of dogs on earth. 

The moon sheds her light, and the dogs howl; 

Every one acts according to his nature. 

To each one his office is allotted by the divine decree, 

And he acts agreeably to his nature." 

Art thou thirsting for the Ocean of spirituality? 
Disport thyself on this island of the Masnavi! 
Disport thyself so long as thou seest every moment 
Spiritual verities revealed in this Masnavi. 
When the wind blows the grass off the water, 
The water then shows forth its own purity. 
Behold the bright and fresh sprays of coral, 
And the princely fruits growing in the water of life! 
So, when the Masnavi is purged of letters and words, 
It drops all these, and appears as the sea of Unity. 
Then speaker and hearer and spoken words 
All three give up the ghost in that consummation. 
Bread-giver and bread-eater and bread itself 
Are purified of their forms and turn to dust. 
But their essences in each of these three grades 
Are distinguished, as in those states, so eternally. 



407 
Book Six 

Their form turns to dust, but their essence not; 

If one says it does, tell him it does not. 

In the world of spirits all three await judgment, 

Sometimes wearing their earthly forms, sometimes not. 

The worth of a man depends on the objects of his aspiration. 

One day a student asked a preacher, 

Saying, "O most orthodox ornament of the pulpit, 

I have a question to ask, O lord of learning; 

Tell me the answer to it in this congregation. 

A bird sat on the top of a wall; 

Which was best, its head or its tail?" 

He replied, "If its face was towards the town, 

And its tail to the villages, then its face was best. 

But if its tail was towards the town, and its face 

Towards the villages, then prefer its tail to its face." 

A bird flies with its wings towards its nest, 

The wings of a man are his aspiration and aim. 

If a lover be befouled with good and evil, 

Yet regard not these; regard rather his aspiration. 

Though a falcon be all white and unmatched in form, 

If he hunts mice he is contemptible and worthless. 

And if an owl fixes his affection on the king, 

He is a falcon in reality; regard not his outward form. 



408 
The Masnavi 



Adam's clay was kneaded in the limits of a trough, 

Yet was he exalted above heaven and stars. 

"We have honored Adam" was not addressed to the sky, 

But to Adam himself full of defects as he was. 

Did one ever propose to earth or heaven to receive 

Beauty, reason, speech and aspiration? 

Would you ever offer to the heavens 

Beauty of face and acuteness of thought? 

O son, did you ever present your silver body 

As an offering to the damsels pictured on bath walls? 

Nay, you pass by those pictures though fair as Huris, 

And offer yourself sooner to half-blind old women. 

What is there in the old women which the pictures lack, 

Which draws you from the pictures to the old women? 

Say not, for I will say it in plain words, 

'Tis reason, sense, perception, thought, and life. 

In the old woman life is infused, 

While the pictures of the bath have no life. 

If the pictures of the bath should stir with life (soul), 

They would uproot your love to all the old women. 

What is soul? 'Tis acquainted with good and evil, 
Rejoicing at pleasant things, grieving at His. 
Since, then, the principle of soul is knowledge, 
He who knows most is most full of soul. 
Knowledge is the effect flowing from soul; 



409 
Book Six 

He who has most of it is most godlike. 

Seeing then, beloved, that knowledge is the mark of soul, 

He who knows most has the strongest soul. 

The world of souls is itself entirely knowledge, 

And he who is void of knowledge is void of soul. 

When knowledge is lacking in a man s nature, 

His soul is like a stone on the plain. 

Primal Soul is the theatre of God's court, 

Soul of souls the exhibition of God Himself. 

All the angels were pure reason and soul, 

Yet when the new soul of Adam came, they were as its 

body. 
When in joy they crowded round that new soul, 
They bowed before it as body does before soul. 

Fear of men's censure the greatest obstacle 
to acceptance of the true faith. 

O Husamu-'d-Din, I might tell some of thy many virtues, 
Were it not for the fear of the evil eyes. 
From evil eyes and malice-empoisoned breaths 
Already have I suffered fatal wounds. 
Therefore I cannot relate thy ecstatic states, 
Save by hints of the ecstatic states of others. 
This manoeuvre is one of the devices of the heart, 
Whereby the heart's feet wend their way to the truth. 



410 
The Masnavi 

Many hearts and souls would become lovers of God 
Did not evil eyes or evil ears hold them back. 
Of these Abu Talib, the Prophet's uncle, was one; 
The malice of the Arabs scared him from the faith. 
He said, "What will the Arabs say of me? 
That my own nephew has perverted me from my reli- 
gion!" 
Muhammad said, "O uncle, confess the faith to me, 
That I may strive with God for thee!" 
He said, "Nay; it will be published by them that hear; 
A secret known to more than two is known to every one.' 
As I live in the midst of these Arabs, 
It will cause me to lose caste with them. 

Yet, had the mighty grace of God led the way, 
How could this fear have vied with God's attraction? 
O Granter of aid, lend us aid 
In this dilemma of the feeble will. 

Prayers for right guidance in the use of free will, 
which gift was refused by heavens and earth, 
but accepted by man to his own. 

This flux and reflux of resolves came to me from Thee, 
Else these tides of will had rested still, O God! 
By the same fiat whereby Thou madest me thus irresolute, 
Of Thy mercy deliver me from this irresolution! 



411 
Book Six 

Thou triest me; O give me aid! 

For men are as women through this trial. 

How long, O Lord, is this trial to last? 

Give me one ruling principle, not ten principles! 

The whole world flees away from its own will and being 
Towards self-abandonment and intoxication. 
In order to escape a while from self-consciousness, 
Men incur the reproach of wine and strong drink; 
For all know well this existence is a snare, 
This thought and memory and will only a hell. 
Therefore they flee from self to being beside themselves, 
Call it intoxication or call it preoccupation, O guided one. 

Ere it is annihilated, no single soul 
Finds admittance to the divine hall of audience. 
What is "ascension" to heaven? Annihilation of self; 
Self-abandonment is the creed and religion of lovers. 

Notes: 

1. Koran xxxvi. 32: "But all gathered together shall be set 
before us." 

2. Koran xvii. 72. 

3. "We proposed to the heavens and to the earth to receive the 
deposit, but they refused the burden. Man undertook to bear 
it, but bath proved unjust and senseless" (Koran xxxiii. 72). 



412 
The Masnavi 

4. "We said unto the angels, 'Prostrate yourselves before 
Adam,' and they prostrated themselves, except Iblis" (Koran 
vi. 10). 

5. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, iii. 222. 

6. Koran xxxiii. 72, quoted above. "Deposit" is here interpreted 
of the will, the ability to go right or wrong. 



STORY I. The Hindu Slave who loved his 
Master's Daughter. 

A certain man had a Hindu slave, whom he had brought 
up along with his children, one of whom was a daughter. 
When the time came for giving the girl in marriage many 
suitors presented themselves, and offered large marriage 
portions to gain her alliance. At last her father selected one 
who was by no means the richest or noblest of the number, 
but pious and well-mannered. The women of the family 
would have preferred one of the richer youths, but the 
father insisted on having his own way, and the marriage was 
settled according to his wishes. As soon as the Hindu slave 
heard of this he fell sick, and the mistress of the family dis- 
covered that he was in love with her daughter, and aspired 
to the honor of marrying her. She was much discomposed 
at this unfortunate accident, and consulted her husband as 
to what was best to be done. He said, "Keep the affair quiet, 



413 
Book Six 

and I will cure the slave of his presumption, in such a way 
that, according to the proverb, 'The Shaikh shall not be 
burnt, yet the meat shall be well roasted.'" He directed his 
wife to flatter the slave with the hope that his wish would 
be granted, and the girl given to him in marriage. He then 
celebrated a mock marriage between the slave and the girl, 
but at night substituted for the girl a boy dressed in female 
attire, with the result that the bridegroom passed the night 
in quarrelling with his supposed bride. Next morning he 
had an interview with the girl and her mother, and said he 
would have no more to do with her, as, though her appear- 
ance was very seductive at a distance, closer acquaintance 
with her had altogether destroyed the charm. Just so the 
pleasures of the world seem sweet till they are tried, and 
then they are found to be very bitter and repulsive. The 
Prophet has declared that "Patience is the key of joy;" in 
other words, that he who controls and restrains himself 
from grasping at worldly pleasures will find true happiness; 
but this precept makes no lasting impression on the bulk of 
mankind. When bitter experience overtakes them, as the 
pain of burning afflicts children, or moths sporting with 
fire, or the pain of amputation a thief, they curse the delu- 
sive temptations which brought this pain upon them; but 
no sooner is the pain abated than they run after the same 
pleasures as eagerly as ever. This is divinely ordained, that 
"God may bring to naught the craft of the infidels." Their 



414 
The Masnavi 

hearts have, as it were, been kindled on the tinder-box of 
bitter experience, but God has put out the sparks of good 
resolution, and caused them to forget their experience and 
vows of abstinence according to the text, "Often as they 
kindle a beacon-fire for war doth God quench it." This is 
illustrated by an anecdote of a man who heard a footstep in 
his house at night, and at once struck a light; but the thief 
put it out without being observed, and the man remained 
under the impression that it had gone out of itself. This 
leads the poet again to dwell on his favorite theme of the 
sole agency of Allah. 

Then, to supply the necessary corrective of this doctrine, 
another anecdote is told concerning Mahmud and Ayaz. The 
courtiers grumbled because Ayaz received the stipend of thir- 
ty courtiers, and Mahmud by a practical test convinced them 
that the talents of Ayaz equalled those of thirty men. The 
courtiers replied that this was due to God's grace, not to any 
merit on the part of Ayaz; and the king confuted them by 
pointing out that man's responsibility and merit, or demerit, 
for his actions are recognized in the Koran. Iblis was con- 
demned for saying to God, "Thou hast caused me to err," 
and Adam was commended or saying, "We have blackened 
ourselves." And elsewhere it is said, "Whosoever shall have 
wrought an atom's weight of good shall behold it; and whoso 
shall have wrought an atom's weight of evil shall behold it." 



415 
Book Six 

Notes: 

1. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, iii. 270. 

2. Koran viii. 18. 

3. Koran v. 69. 

4. Koran vii. 15 and 22. 

5. Koran vii. 15 and 22. 

6. Koran xcix. 7. 



STORY II. The Fowler and the Bird. 

A fowler went out to catch birds, and disguised himself 
by wrapping his head up in leaves and grass, so as to avoid 
frightening the birds away from his snare. A bird of some 
sagacity came near him, and suspected something wrong, 
but foolishly lingered near, and began to question him as to 
his business. The fowler said he was a hermit who had 
retired from the world and dressed himself in weeds for the 
health of his soul. The bird said he was surprised to see a 
Mosalman doing this in contravention of the Prophet's pre- 
cept, "There is no monkery in Islam," and his repeated dec- 
larations that Islam involves association with the faithful 
and avoidance of a solitary life. The fowler replied that a 
solitary life was allowed in heathen countries for the soul's 
health. The bird then asked what the grains of wheat were 



416 
The Masnavi 

that were strewed on the trap. The fowler replied that they 
were the property of an orphan, which had been deposited 
with him in consequence of his known probity. The bird 
then asked permission to eat some, as he was very hungry, 
and the fowler, with much pretended reluctance, allowed 
him to do so. The moment he touched the grain the trap 
closed upon him, and he found himself a prisoner. He then 
abused the fowler for his trickery, but the fowler said he had 
only himself to blame for his greediness in eating the food 
which belonged to an orphan. The moral is, that it is not 
destiny which leads people into afflictions, but their own 
errors and vices. 

The bird's cries to God for aid. 

When he had eaten the grain he was caught in the trap, 
And began to recite the chapters "Yasin" and "An am." 

Then he began to wail and cry loudly, 
So that the very fowler and his trap shook with grief. 
He said, "My back is broken by the conflict of my 
thoughts; 

Beloved One, come and stroke my head in mercy! 
The palm of Thy hand on my head gives me rest, 
Thy hand is a sign of Thy bounteous providence. 
Remove not Thy shadow from my head, 

1 am afflicted, afflicted, afflicted! 



417 
Book Six 

Sleep has deserted my eyes 

Through my longing for Thee, O Envy of cypresses! 

Though I be unworthy of Thy favor, how were it 

If thou shouldst regard the grieves of unworthy me? 

What claim of right can a non-existent thing make 

To have the doors of Thy bounty opened to it? 

Yet Thy bounty had regard to my senseless dust 

And endued it with the ten jewels of the senses 

Five external senses and five internal senses, 

Whereby inanimate seed became a living man. 

O Light on high! what is repentance without Thy grace 

But a mere mockery of the beard of repentance; 

Thou rootest up the hairs of such repentance, 

Repentance is the shadow, Thou the shining Moon. 

Alas! Thou hast ruined my house and home; 

How can I cease wailing while Thou oppressest me? 

How can I flee away when there is no living away? 

Without Thy sustaining lordship there is no slave. 

take my life, Thou that art the source of life! 
For apart from Thee I am wearied of my life. 

1 am a lover well versed in lovers' madness, 
I am weary of learning and sense. 

Since my bashfulness is destroyed, I will publish secrets; 
How long must I bear this trepidation and anxiety? 
Formerly I was covered by modesty as by a veil, 
Now I will leap from it under Thy coverlet! 
O comrades, our Beloved has closed up all paths; 



418 
The Masnavi 



We are as lame deer, and He as a raging lion. 

2 
Say what remedy is there but resignation 

When one is fallen into the hands of the raging lion?" 



The poet then passes on to the subject of the need for 
constant watchfulness, in order to avoid the snares of the 
world, and not to miss the divine blessing whenever it may 
appear. There is a tradition, "When half the night has 
passed Allah will descend to earth, and cry, 'Ho, ye that ask, 
it shall be answered to you; and ye that crave pardon, it shall 
be pardoned to you; and ye that petition, your petitions 
shall be granted.'" But all who sleep the sleep of negligence 
will miss the promised blessing. This is illustrated by the 
story of a lover who obtained an assignation with his mis- 
tress, but when she came, was found asleep, and was accord- 
ingly rejected. 

Notes: 

1. See Miskkat ul Masabih, ii. 541. 

2. "To God I commit my case" (Koran xl. 47). 



STORY III. The Drunken Turkish Amir and the Minstrel. 

Then follow exhortations to undergo "the pains of nega- 
tion," as they are called in the Gulshan i Raz, i.e., even as 



419 
Book Six 

the great saint and poet Faridu-'d-Din 'Attar cast away his 
drugs, to cast one's own will, knowledge, power, and "self" 
into the unique river of "annihilation," and from that state 
to rise to the higher state of eternal existence in God. The 
end and object of all negation is to attain to subsequent 
affirmation, as the negation in the creed, "There is no 
God," finds its complement and purpose in the affirmation 
"but God." Just so the purpose of negation of self is to clear 
the way for the apprehension of the fact that there is no 
existence but The One. The intoxication of life and its plea- 
sures and occupations veils the Truth from men's eyes, and 
they ought to pass on to the spiritual intoxication which 
makes men beside themselves and lifts them to the beatific 
vision of eternal Truth. This is the same thing as saying they 
must pass on from negation to affirmation, from ignorance 
to the highest knowledge. This is illustrated by the story of 
the Turkish noble and the minstrel, which is given with an 
apology for using illustrations derived from drunkenness. A 
Turkish noble awoke from his drunken sleep, and called his 
minstrel to enliven him. The minstrel was a spiritual man, 
and proceeded to improve the occasion by singing a song 
with a deep spiritual meaning: 

"I know not if thou art a moon or an idol, 
I know not what thou requirest of me. 
I know not what service to pay thee, 
Whether to keep silence or to speak. 



420 
The Masnavi 

Thou art not apart from me, yet, strange to say, 
I know not where I am, or where thou art. 
I know not wherefore thou art dragging me, 
Now embracing me, and now wounding me!" 

Thus the whole of his song consisted of repetitions of the 
words, "I know not." At last the noble could endure it no 
longer, and he took a stick and threatened to beat the min- 
strel, saying, "O wretch, tell us something you do know, 
and do not repeat what you do not know, if I ask you 
whence you come or what you have eaten, and you answer 
only by negations, your answer is a waste of time. Say what 
you mean by all these negations." The minstrel replied, "My 
meaning is a concealed one. I fear to make affirmations in 
opposition to your negations, so I state negations that you 
may get a hint of the corresponding affirmations from 
them. I now hint the truth to you in my song; and when 
death comes to you, you will learn the mysteries which at 
present I can only hint." 

Spiritual mysteries set forth in the Masnavi 
under similes of intoxication. 

2 
That wine of God is gained from that minstrel, 

This bodily wine from this minstrel. 

Both of these have one and the same name in speech, 

But the difference between their worth is great. 



421 
Book Six 

Men's bodies are like pitchers with closed mouths; 

Beware, till you see what is inside them. 

The pitcher of this body holds the water of life, 

Whilst that one holds deadly poison. 

If you look at the contents you are wise; 

If you look only at the vessel you are misguided. 

Know words resemble these bodies, 

And the meaning resembles the soul. 

The body's eyes are ever intent on bodies, 

The soul's eyes on the reasonable soul; 

Wherefore, in the figures of the words of the Masnavi, 

The form misleads, but the inner meaning guides. 

In the Koran it is declared that its parables 

"Mislead some and guide some." 

O God! when a spiritual man talks of wine, 

How can a fellow spiritual man mistake his meaning? 

Thus that minstrel began his intoxicating song, 

"O give me Thy cup, Thou whom I see not! 

Thou art my face; what wonder if I see it not? 

Extreme nearness acts as an obscuring veil. 

Thou art my reason; what wonder if I see Thee not 

Through the multitude of intervening obstacles? 

Thou art 'nearer to me than my neck vein,' 

How can I call to Thee, 'Ho,' as if thou wert far off? 

Nay, but I will mislead some by calling in the desert, 

To hide my Beloved from those of whom I am jealous! 



422 
The Masnavi 

This is illustrated by an anecdote of the Prophet and 
Ayisha. Ayisha was once sitting with the Prophet without 
her veil, when a blind man came in. Ayisha, knowing well 
the jealous disposition of her husband, at once prepared to 
retire on which the Prophet said, "The man is blind and 
cannot see you." Ayisha replied by signs that though the 
man could not see her she could see him. Just so the spiri- 
tual man is jealous of exposing his mysteries to the gaze of 
the profane, and from excess of caution veils them in signs 
and hints. 

Then comes a commentary on the tradition, "Die before 
you die," i.e., mortify your carnal passions and lusts, and 
deny and annihilate your carnal " self" before the death of 
the body overtakes you. Men who put off repentance till 
they are at the point of death are likened to the Shi'as of 
Aleppo, who every year on the Ashura, or tenth day of 
Muharram, meet at the Antioch gate to bewail the martyr- 
dom of Hasan and Husain. Once, while they were thus 
engaged, a Sunni poet arrived at the city, and inquired the 
reason of this excessive grief and mourning. The Shi'as 
rebuked him for his ignorance of sacred history, and he said, 
"This martyrdom happened a long time ago; but it would 
seem, from your excessive grief, that the news of it has only 
just reached you. You must have been sleeping all this time 
not to have heard it before, and now you are mourning for 



423 
Book Six 

your own sleepiness!" To the truly spiritual, who have drunk 
of God's wine and bear the "tokens of it on their fore- 
heads," death is an occasion for rejoicing, not for wailing. 
The man who is engrossed with the trifling pleasures of the 
world and blind to the ample provision made for the soul is 
like an ant in a barn of wheat, toiling to carry off a single 
grain, when ample stores of wheat are already at its dispos- 
al. Spiritual men must continue urging the worldly to 
repent and avail themselves of this heavenly provision for 
their souls, careless, like Noah, whether their preaching is 
listened to or not. This is illustrated by an anecdote of a 
man who knocked at the door of an empty house at mid- 
night, in order to give notice that it was time to prepare the 
meal taken at dawn in Ramazan. 

Reason for knocking at the empty house. 

You have said your say; now hear my answer, 

So as not to remain in astonishment and bewilderment. 

Though to you this time seems midnight, 

To me the dawn of joyful morn seems nigh. 

To the vulgar all parts of the world seem dead, 
But to God they are instinct with sense and love. 
And as to your saying that "this house is empty, 
Why then should I beat a drum before it?" 



424 
The Masnavi 

Know that the people of God expend money, 

And build many mosques and holy places, 

And spend health and wealth in distant pilgrimages, 

In ecstatic delight, like intoxicated lovers; 

And none of them ever say, "The Ka'ba is empty;" 

How can one who knows the truth say that? 

These people are ranged in battle array, 
And risk their lives to gain God's favor; 
One plunged in calamities like Job himself, 
Another exhibiting patience like Jacob. 
Thousands of them are thirsty and afflicted, 
Striving in earnest desire to do God's will. 
I likewise, in order to please the merciful God, 
Beat my drum at every door in hope of dawn. 
Seek ye a purchaser who will pay you gold; 
Where will you find one more liberal than God? 
He buys the worthless rubbish which is your wealth, 
He pays you the light that illumines your heart. 
He accepts these frozen and lifeless bodies of yours, 
And gives you a kingdom beyond what you dream of. 
He takes a few drops of your tears, 
And gives you the divine fount sweeter than sugar. 
He takes your sighs fraught with grief and sadness, 
And for each sigh gives rank in heaven as interest. 
In return for the sigh-wind that raised tear-clouds, 



425 
Book Six 

God gave Abraham the title of "Father of the faithful." 
Come! in this incomparable and crowded mart 
Sell your old goods and take a kingdom in payment! 

Notes: 

1 . Koran cxii. 4. 

2. "A wine cup tempered at the camphor fountain shall the just 
quaff" (Koran lxxvi. 5). 

3. Koran ii. 24. 

4. See couplet 122 of the Guishan i Raz: "When the object 
looked at is very close to the eye, The eye is darkened so 
that it cannot see it." I.e., When man is united with God he 
can no longer behold Him, for he is dwelling in Him. 

5. Koran 1. 15. 

6. Koran xlviii. 29. 



STORY IV. The Purchase ofBilal. 

To illustrate the rich recompense that is awarded to those 
who are faithful in tribulation, the story of Bilal is next 
recounted at length. Bilal was an Abyssinian slave belonging 
to a Jew of Mecca, and had incurred his master's displeasure 
in consequence of having embraced Islam. For this offence 
his master tortured him by exposing him to the heat of the 



426 
The Masnavi 

midday sun, and beating him with thorns. But notwith- 
standing his anguish, Bilal would not recant his faith, and 
uttered only the cry, "Ahad, Ahad!" "The One, the One 
God!" At this moment Abu Bakr, the "Faithful witness," 
happened to pass by, and was so struck by his constancy that 
he resolved to buy him of the Jew. After much higgling and 
attempts at cheating on the Jew's part he succeeded in doing 
so, and at once set him free. When the Prophet heard of this 
purchase he said to Abu Bakr, "Give me a share in him;" but 
Abu Bakr told him, somewhat to his annoyance, that he had 
already set him free. Notwithstanding this Bilal attached 
himself to the Prophet, and was afterwards promoted to the 
honourable post of the Prophet's Mu'azzin. 

This is followed by the story of Hilal, another holy man 
who, like Bilal and Luqman and Joseph, served a noble in 
the capacity of groom. His affections were set on things 
above, and he was ever pressing upwards towards the high 
mark of spiritual exaltation, and saying, like Moses, "I will 
not stop till I reach the confluence of the two seas, and for 
years will I journey on." Herein he presented a great con- 
trast to ordinary men, who are ever giving way to their lusts, 
and so being dragged down into the state of mere animals, 
or even lower. Hilal's master was a Mosalman, yet one 
whose eyes were only partially open to the truth. He was in 
the habit of asking his guests their age; and if they answered 



427 
Book Six 

doubtfully, saying, "Perhaps eighteen, or seventeen, or six- 
teen, or even fifteen," he would rebuke them, saying, "As 
you seem to be putting yourself lower and lower, you had 
better go back at once to your mother's womb." These 
guests are a type of men who lower themselves from the 
rank of humanity to that of animals. This master, however, 
was blind to Hilal's spiritual excellence, and allowed him to 
drag on a miserable existence in his stables. At last Hilal fell 
sick; but no one cared for him, till the Prophet himself, 
warned by a divine intimation, came to visit him, and com- 
miserated his wretched condition. Hilal proved himself to 
be faithful through tribulation; for, instead of grumbling at 
his lot, he replied, "How is that sleep wretched which is bro- 
ken by the advent of the Sun of prophecy? or how can he be 
called athirst on whose head is poured the water of life?" In 
truth, Hilal had by degrees become purified from the stain 
of earthly existence and earthly qualities, and washed in the 
fountain of the water of life, i.e., the holy revelations of the 
Prophet, till he had attained the exalted grade of purity 
enjoined on those who would study God's Word aright. 

Growth in grace is accomplished by 
slow degrees, and not per saltum. 

Since you have told the story of Hilal (the new moon) 
Now set forth the story of Badr (the full moon). 



428 
The Masnavi 

That new moon and that full moon are now united, 
Removed from duality and defect and shortcomings. 
That Hilal is now exalted above inward defect; 
His outward defects served as degrees of ascension. 
Night after night that mentor taught him grades of ascent 
And through his patient waiting gave him happiness. 

The mentor says, "O raw hastener, through patient waiting, 

You must climb to the summit step by step. 

Boil your pot by degrees and in a masterly way; 

Food boiled in mad haste is spoiled. 

Doubtless God could have created the universe 

By the fiat 'Be!' in one moment of time; 

Why, then, did He protract His work over six days, 

Each of which equaled a thousand years, O disciple? 

Why does the formation of an infant take nine months? 

Because God's method is to work by slow degrees, 

Why did the formation of Adam take forty days? 

Because his clay was kneaded by slow degrees. 

Not hurrying on like you, O raw one, 

Who claim to be a Shaikh whilst yet only a child! 

You run up like a gourd higher than all plants, 

But where is your power of resistance or combat? 

You have leant on trees or on walls, 

And so mounted up like a gourd, O little dog rose; 

Even though your prop may be a lofty cypress, 



429 
Book Six 

At last you are seen to be dry and hollow. 

O gourd, your bright green hue soon turns yellow. 

For it is not a natural but an artificial color." 

This is illustrated by an anecdote of an ugly old hag who 
painted her face to make it look pretty, but was detected 
and exposed to scorn. 

Notes: 

1 . Koran xviii. 59. 

2. Koran lvi. 79. 



STORY V. The Sufi and the Qazi. 

A sick man laboring under an incurable disease went to a 
physician for advice. The physician felt his pulse, and per- 
ceived that no treatment would cure him, and therefore told 
him to go away and do whatever he had a fancy for. This 
was the advice given by God to the Israelites when they were 
seen to be incurable by the admonitions of the prophets. 
"Do what you will, but God's eye is on all your doings." 
The sick man blessed the physician for his agreeable pre- 
scription, and at once went to a stream, where he saw a Sufi 
bathing his feet. He was seized with a desire to hit the Sufi 



430 
The Masnavi 

on the back, and, calling to mind the physician's advice, at 
once carried his wish into effect. The Sufi jumped up, and 
was about to return the blow, but when he saw the weakly 
and infirm condition of his assailant he restrained himself. 
He disregarded his present angry impulse, and had regard to 
the future, so that the non-existent future became to him 
more really existent than the existing present. Here the poet 
digresses to point out that when wise men recognize the 
true relative importance of the present and the future they 
cease to shrink from death and annihilation, which lifts 
them to a higher and nobler life. This is illustrated by an 
anecdote of Mahmud of Ghazni, quoted from Faridu- 'd- 
Din 'Attar. Mahmud, in one of his campaigns, took prison- 
er a Hindu boy, who at first regarded him with the greatest 
dread, in consequence of the stories he had heard of him 
from his mother, but afterwards experienced Mahmud's 
kindness and tenderness, and came to know him and love 
him. So it is with death. According to the Hadis "Those 
who have passed away do not grieve because of death, but 
because of wasted opportunities in life." The Masnavi is "a 
shop of poverty and self-abnegation," and a treasury con- 
taining only the doctrines of "Unity;" and if its stories sug- 
gest aught else, that is due to the evil promptings of Iblis, 
who also misled the Prophet himself to attribute undue 
power to the idols Lat and 'Uzza and Manat, in a verse 
which was afterwards cancelled. The Sufi, being full of the 
spirit of self-abnegation, did not retaliate on his weak, 



431 
Book Six 

assailant but led him before the Qazi. On learning the facts 
of the case the Qazi said, "This Faqir is sick to death, and 
you, being a Sufi, are, according to your profession, dead to 
the world. How, then, can I award a penalty against him in 
your favor? I am a judge, not of the dead, but of the living." 
The Sufi was dissatisfied with this view of the case, and 
again pressed the Qazi to do him justice. On this the Qazi 
asked the sick Faqir how much money he had, and on his 
replying, "Six dirhams," took pity on him, and let him off 
with a fine of three dirhams only. The moment the sentence 
was pronounced the sick Faqir went up to the Qazi and 
struck him a blow on the back, and cried out, "Now take 
the other three dirhams and let me go!" The Sufi then 
pointed out to the Qazi that by his ill-timed leniency to the 
Faqir he had brought this blow upon himself, and urged 
him to apply in his own case those principles of mercy and 
forgiveness which he had proposed in the case of another. 
The Qazi said that, for his part, he recognized every blow 
and misfortune that might befall him as divinely ordained, 
and sent for his good, according to the text, "Laugh little 
and weep much," and that his judgment in the matter of 
the Faqir had not been dictated by impulse, but by inspira- 
tion. The Sufi again asked him how evils and misfortunes 
could proceed from the divine fount of good, and the Qazi 
replied that what seems good and evil to us has no absolute 
existence, but is merely as the foam on the surface of the 
vast ocean. Moreover, every misfortune occurring to the 



432 
The Masnavi 

faithful in this life will be amply compensated for in the life 
to come. The Sufi asked why this world should not be so 
arranged that only good should be experienced in it, and 
the Qazi replied by telling him an anecdote of a Turk and a 
tailor. The Turk, who typifies the careless pleasure-seeker, 
was so intent on listening to the jokes and amusing stories 
of the tailor, typifying the seductive world, that he allowed 
himself to be robbed of the silk which was to furnish him 
with a vesture for eternity. The Sufi again retorted that he 
did not see why the world would not get on better without 
the evil in it, and the Qazi replied with the poet's favorite 
argument that there would be no possibility of being virtu- 
ous if there were no temptations to be vicious. As Bishop 
Butler says, this life is a state of probation, and such a state 
necessarily involves trials and difficulties and dangers to be 
resisted and overcome. 

The dead regret not dying, but having lost opportunities in life. 

Well said that Leader of mankind, 

That whosoever passes away from the world 

Does not grieve and lament over his death, 

But grieves ever over lost opportunities. 

He says, "Why did I not keep death always in view, 

Which is the treasury of wealth and sustenance? 

Why did I blindly all my life set my affections 

On vain shadows which perish at death? 



433 
Book Six 

My regret is not that I have died, 

But that I rested on these vain shadows in life. 

I saw not that my body was a mere shadow or foam, 

Which foam rises out of and lives on the Ocean (God). 

When the Ocean casts its foam-drops to land, 

Go to the graveyard and behold them, 

And ask them, "Where is your motion and activity? 

The Ocean has cast you into a mortal sickness!" 

They will answer by their condition, if not with words, 

"Put this question to the Ocean, not to us!" 

How can mere foam move unless moved by the waves? 

How can dust mount on high unless raised by wind? 

When you see the dust-cloud, see the wind too! 

When you see the foam, see the ocean that heaves it! 

Ah! look till you see your own real final cause, 

The rest of you is only fat and flesh, warp and woof. 

Your fat kindles no light or flame in a lamp; 

Your kneaded flesh is not good for roasting. 

Burn up, then, all this body of yours with discernment; 

Rise to sight, to sight, to sight! 

Virtue cannot exist without temptation 
and difficulties to be overcome. 

The Sufi said, "The Great Helper is able 
To procure for us profit without loss. 
He who casts into the fire roses and trees 



434 
The Masnavi 

Can accomplish good without injury to any. 

He who extracts the rose from the thorn 

Can also turn this winter into spring. 

He who exalts the heads of the cypresses 

Is able also out of sadness to bring joy. 

He by whose fiat all non-existent things exist, 

What harm to Him were it if He made them eternal? 

He who gave to the body a soul and made it live, 

What loss to Him were it if He never caused it to die? 

How would it be if That Liberal One were to give 

Their hearts' desire to his slaves without toil, 

And keep away from these feeble ones 

The ambushed snares of lust and temptations of Iblis?" 

The Qazi said, "If there were no bitter things, 

And no opposition of fair and foul, stone and pearl, 

And no lust or Satan or concupiscence, 

And no wounds or war or fraud, 

Pray, O destroyer of virtue, by what name and title 

Could the King of kings address His slaves? 

How could He say, 'O temperate or O meek one!' 

Or, 'O courageous one, or O wise one?' 

How could there be temperate, gentle, or liberal men 

If there were no cursed Satan to tempt them astray? 

Rustam and Hamza would be all the same as cowards; 

Wisdom and knowledge would be useless and vain. 



435 
Book Six 

Wisdom and knowledge serve to guide the wanderers; 

Were there but one road wisdom would be needless. 

To pamper the house of your body fleeting as water, 

Do you think it right to ruin both worlds? 

I know you are pure of guile and ripe, 

And ask this only to edify the ignorant. 

The ills of fortune and all troubles soever 

Are better than exile from God and neglect of Him; 

For the former pass away, but the latter abide; 

He is happy who carries a wary heart before God." 

This is illustrated by an anecdote of a woman who com- 
plained of the hard life she had to lead with her husband 
owing to his poverty, and was silenced by being asked 
whether she would prefer to be divorced. No troubles are so 
hard to hear as separation from the Beloved. Fasting and 
holy war bring pains with them, but not so great as those 
incurred by banishment from God. In the midst of their 
troubles God is ever caring for His servants, and they must 
not let their tribulations blot out the memory of God's pre- 
vious goodness to them. 

To do this shows an entire absence of growth in grace. 
This is illustrated by an anecdote of a sage and a monk. The 
sage asked the monk which was the older, his white beard or 
himself. The monk replied that he himself was older by 



436 
The Masnavi 

some years, whereupon the sage rebuked him for his igno- 
rance, saying his beard had grown pure and white, but he 
was still black with sin, and had progressed not at all in 
goodness since he was born. 

Each of our members testifies to God's bounties towards us. 

Inquire now, I pray, of each one of your members; 

These dumb members have a thousand tongues. 

Inquire the detail of the bounties of the All-sustainer, 

Which are recorded in the volume of the universe. 

Day and night you are eagerly asking for news, 

Whilst every member of your body is telling you news. 

Since each member of your body issued from Not-being, 

How much pleasure has it seen, and how much pain? 

For no member grows and flourishes without pleasure, 

And each member is weakened by every pain. 

The member endures, but that pleasure is forgotten, 

Yet not all forgotten, but hidden from the senses. 

Like summer wherein cotton is produced, 

The cotton remains, but the summer is forgotten. 

Or like ice which is formed in great frost, 

The frost departs, but the ice is still before us. 

The ice is mindful of that extreme cold, 

And even in winter that crop is mindful of the summer. 

In like manner, O son, every member of your body 



437 
Book Six 

Tells you tales of God's bounties to your body. 

Even as a woman who has borne twenty children, 

Each child tells a tale of pleasure felt by her. 

She became not pregnant save after sexual pleasure, 

Can a garden bloom without the spring? 

Pregnant women and their teeming wombs 

Tell tales of love frolics in the spring. 

So every tree which nurtures its fruits 

Has been, like Mary, impregnated by the Unseen King. 

Though fire's heat be hidden in the midst of water, 

Yet a thousand boiling bubbles prove it present. 

Though the heat of the fire be working unseen, 

Yet its bubbles signify its presence plainly. 

In like manner, the members of those enjoying "union" 
Become big with child, viz., with forms of "states" and 

"words." 
Gazing on the beauty of these forms they stand agape, 
And the forms of the world vanish from their sight. 
These spiritual progenies are not born of the elements, 
And are perforce invisible to the sensual eye. 
These progenies are born of divine apparitions, 
And are therefore bidden by veils without color. 
I said "born," but in reality they are not born; 
I used this expression only by way of indication. 
But keep silence till the King bids you speak, 



438 
The Masnavi 

Offer not your nightingale songs to these roses; 
For they themselves are saying to you in loud tones, 
"O nightingale, hold your peace, and listen to us!" 
Those two kinds of fair forms (ecstatic states and words) 
Are undeniable proofs of a previous "union;" 
Yea, those two kinds of exalted manifestations 
Are the evident fruits of a preceding wedlock. 

The ecstasy is past, but your members recall it; 
Ask them about it, or call it to mind yourself. 

When sorrow seizes you, if you are wise, 

You will question that sorrow-fraught moment, 

Saying to it, "O sorrow, who now deniest 

Thy portion of bounty given thee by the Perfect One, 

Even if each moment be not to thee a glad spring, 

Yet of what is thy body, like a rose-heap, a storehouse? 

Thy body is a heap of roses, thy thought rosewater; 

'Twere strange if rosewater ignored the rose-heap!" 

Notes: 

1. Koran xli. 40. 

2. Koran liii. 19, and Rodwell's note. 

3. Koran ix. 84. 

4. Koran liii. 3. 

5. Koran xxvi. 88. 



439 
Book Six 

6. Cp. Nicom. Ethics, x., iv. 6. 

7. Compare Gulshan i Raz, I. 624. Ecstatic words and states 
are the offspring of communion with God. 



STORY VI. The Faqir and the Hidden Treasure. 

Notwithstanding the clear evidence of God's bounty, 
engendering these spiritual states in men, philosophers and 
learned men, wise in their own conceit, obstinately shut their 
eyes to it, and look afar off for what is really close to them, so 
that they incur the penalty of "being branded on the nos- 
trils," adjudged against unbelievers. This is illustrated by the 
story of a poor Faqir who prayed to God that he might be fed 
without being obliged to work for his food. A divine voice 
came to him in his sleep and directed him to go to the house 
of a certain scribe and take a certain writing that he should 
find there. He did so, and on reading the writing found that 
it contained directions for finding a hidden treasure. The 
directions were as follows: "Go outside the city to the dome 
which covers the tomb of the martyr; turn your back to the 
tomb and your face towards Mecca, place an arrow in your 
bow, and where the arrow falls there dig for the treasure." But 
before the Faqir had time to commence the search the rumor 
of the writing and its contents had reached the king, who at 
once sent and took it away from the Faqir, and began to 
search for the treasure on his own account. After shooting 



440 
The Masnavi 

many arrows and digging in all directions the king failed to 
find the treasure, and got weary of searching, and returned 
the writing to the Faqir. Then the Faqir tried what he could 
do, but failed altogether to hit the spot where the treasure was 
buried. At last, despairing of success by his own unaided 
efforts, he cast his care upon God, and implored the divine 
assistance. Then a voice from heaven came to him, saying, 
"You were directed to fix an arrow on your bow, but not to 
draw your bow with all your might, as you have been doing. 
Shoot as gently as possible, that the arrow may fall close to 
you, for the hidden treasure is indeed 'nearer to you than your 
neck-vein."' Men overlook the spiritual treasures close to 
them, and for this reason it is that prophets have no honor in 
their own countries, as is illustrated by the cases of the saint 
Abu-'l-Hasan Khirqani and the Prophet Hud or Heber. 

God rules men by alternations of hope and fear. 

This sad Faqir too put up his cries for aid, 

And bore off the ball of acceptance from the field. 

But at times he distrusted the efficacy of his prayers, 

On account of the delay in answering them. 

Again, hope of the mercy of the Lord 

Arose in his heart as an earnest of rejoicing. 

When he was hopeless and ceasing to pray in weariness 

He heard from God the word "Ascend!" 



441 
Book Six 

God is an Abaser and an Exalter 

Without these two processes nothing comes into being. 

Behold the abasement of earth and uplifting of heaven; 

Without these two heaven would not revolve, O man! 

The abasement and exaltation of earth is otherwise, 

Half the year is barren, half green and verdant. 

The abasement and exaltation of weary time 

Is otherwise again, half day and half night. 

The abasement and exaltation of this compound body 

Is now health and now grievous sickness. 

Know all the conditions of the world are in this wise, 

Drought, famine, peace, war, and trials. 

This world flies, as it were, with these two wings; 

Through these all souls are homes of hope and fear; 

So that the world keeps trembling like leaves, 

In the cold and hot winds of death and resurrection. 

Till tbe jar of pure wine of our 'Isa (Unity) 

Shall supersede the jar of many-colored wine (plurality), 

For that world (of unity) is as a saltpan; 

Whatever enters it loses its varied hues. 

On the text, "Verily I am about to place a Khalifa or 
Vicegerent on earth" . 

Whereas the aim and will of the Merciful God 
Inclined to the revelation and manifestation of Himself, 



442 
The Masnavi 



And one opposite cannot be shown but by its opposite, 

And that Unique King of kings has no opposite or peer, 

Therefore that Lord of the heart set up a Khalifa, 

To serve as a mirror to reflect His own sovereignty. 

Therefore He gave him unlimited purity and light, 

And on the other side He set darkness opposing the light. 

God set up two standards, a white and a black one, 

The one Adam and the other Iblis; 

And between these two mighty armies 

Ensued war and battle and all we have witnessed. 

Thus, too, in the second generation lived pure Abel; 

Cain was the opposite of his pure light. 

In like manner these two standards of right and wrong 

Were borne aloft till the age of Nimrod. 

Nimrod was the opponent and adversary of Abraham, 

And their opposing camps warred and fought one another. 

When God grew weary of the length of this war, 

His fire was appointed to arbitrate between them. 

He commanded fire and its flaming torment 

To settle the matter in dispute between them. 

Age after age these two parties contended, 

Even till the time of Pharaoh and gentle Moses. 

Between these two the war was waged for years, 

And when it passed all bounds and affliction increased 

God made the water of the Nile a judge between them, 

That the one who deserved preeminence should endure. 

In like manner it went on till the time of Mustafa 



443 
Book Six 

And Abu Jahl, that prince of iniquity. 
Likewise did God ordain a punishment for the Thamud 
Namely, an earthquake which destroyed their lives. 
Likewise a punishment for the Adites, 
Namely, a swiftly rising and violent wind. 
Likewise God ordained acute punishment for Qarun; 
For the earth concealed wrath under its mildness, 
Till all its mildness was converted into wrath, 
And it swallowed up Qarun and his wealth in its depth. 
So with the mouthful which nourishes your body 
And wards off the darts of hunger like a cuirass, 
When God instils wrath into this mouthful of bread, 
That same bread will choke you like a halter. 
This same garment which protects you from the cold, 
God may give it the quality of intense cold, 
So that this warm vest may become to your body 
Cold as ice and biting as frost; 
So that you will cast off these furs and silks, 
And seek for a refuge from cold with cold itself. 
You have only one eye, not two (for these two possibili- 
ties). 
You have forgotten the story of the "shadowing cloud. 
God's command came to city and village, 
And to house and wall, saying, "Afford no shade! 
Ward not off the pouring rain and the sun's heat;" 
Till those men hasted to listen to the prophet Shu'aib 
Saying, 'O king, have pity; most of us are dead!' 



6 



AAA 
The Masnavi 

But read the rest of the tale in the commentaries. 
When that Omnipotent hand made the staff a serpent, 
If you have reason, that portent should suffice. 
You have sight indeed, but fail to mark carefully; 
Your eyes are dimmed and closed with fat. 

The heavenly treasure lies "nearer to us than our neck-vein". 

The Faqir was in this state when a divine voice came, 

And God thus solved his difficulties, 

Saying, "The voice told you to place an arrow on the bow, 

It did not bid you draw the bowstring to the utmost; 

It did not bid you draw the bow with all your might; 

It said, 'Adjust an arrow,' not 'Draw the bow fully' 

You elevated the bow to excess, 

You magnified unduly the bowman's art, 

Go! abandon this strong bowmanship, 

Fix an arrow on the string, but make it not fly far. 

When it falls, dig in that spot and search, 

Abandon force and seek the treasure with humility." 

God is "what is nearer to you than your neck-vein," 
You have cast the arrow of speculation afar off. 
O you, who have made ready your bow and arrows, 
The game is close to you, and you shoot too far off. 
The further a man shoots, the further off he is, 
And the more removed from the treasure he seeks. 



445 
Book Six 

The philosopher kills himself with thinking, 

Tell him that his back is turned to that treasure; 

Tell him that the more he runs to and fro, 

The Almighty says, "Make efforts in our ways," 

Not "Make efforts away from us," O restless one. 

Like Canaan, who went away, from shame to follow Noah, 

Up to the top of that lofty mountain, 

The more he sought safety on that mountain, 

The further was he removed from the safe asylum. 

So this Faqir, in search of that hidden treasure, 

Day after day drew his bow stronger and stronger; 

And the harder he drew his bow, 

The further was he from the seat of that treasure. 

This parable applies to all times, 

For the soul of the ignorant is pledged to misfortune. 

Because the ignorant man is ashamed of a master, 

Perforce he goes and opens a new school for himself. 

That school is higher than your true master, O beloved, 

And hard of access, and full of scorpions and snakes. 

Straightway overthrow it, and turn back again 

To the green garden and sweet watered meadows. 

Not like Canaan, who, through pride and ignorance, 

Sought his ark of safety on a protecting mountain. 

His far-shooting learning veiled his eyes, 

While his heart's desire was all the while in his grasp. 

Ah! oftentimes have learning and genius and wit 



446 
The Masnavi 

Proved to the traveler to be Ghouls and highwaymen! 

o 

"The majority of those in Paradise are the simple," 

Who have escaped the snares of philosophy. 

Strip yourself bare of overweening intellect, 

That grace may ever be shed upon you from above. 

Cleverness is the opposite of humility and submission, 

Quit cleverness, and consort with simple-mindedness! 

Notes: 

1. Koran lxviii. 16. 

2. Koran 1.15. 

3. Koran ii. 28. 

4. Because, as Sir T. Browne says, "God is all things." 

5. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 265, and note. 

6. Koran xxvi. 189. The cloud emitted heat instead of rain, to 
punish those who disregarded Shu'aib, or Jethro. 

7. Koran xxix. 69. 

8. A Hadis. Cp. 1 Cor. i. 25, 26. 



STORY VII. The Three Travelers. 

A Mosalman was traveling with two unbelievers, a Jew 
and a Christian. Like wisdom linked with the flesh and the 
devil. God was "nigh unto His faithful servant," and when 



447 
Book Six 

the first stage was completed He caused a present of sweet- 
meats to be laid before the travelers. As the Jew and the 
Christian had already eaten their evening meal when the 
sweetmeats arrived, they proposed to lay them aside till the 
morrow; but the Mosalman, who was keeping fast, and 
therefore could not eat before nightfall, proposed to eat 
them that night. To this the other two refused to consent, 
alleging that the Mosalman wanted to eat the whole of the 
sweetmeats himself. Then the Mosalman proposed to divide 
them into three portions, so that each might eat his own 
portion when he pleased; but this also was objected to by 
the others, who quoted the proverb, "The divider is in hell" 
The Mosalman explained to them that this proverb meant 
the man who divides his allegiance between God and lust; 
but they still refused to give way, and the Mosalman there- 
fore submitted, and lay down to sleep in the endurance of 
the pangs of hunger. Next morning, when they awoke, it 
was agreed between them that each should relate his 
dreams, and that the sweetmeats should be awarded to him 
whose dream was the best. The Jew said that he had 
dreamed that Moses had carried him to the top of Mount 
Sinai, and shown him marvelous visions of the glory of 
heaven and the angels. The Christian said he had dreamed 
that 'Isa had carried him up to the fourth heaven and shown 
him all the glories of the heavens. Finally the Mosalman 
said that the Prophet Muhammad had appeared to him in 



448 
The Masnavi 

person, and after commending him for his piety in saying 
his prayers and keeping fast so strictly on the previous 
night, had commanded him to eat up those divinely pro- 
vided sweetmeats as a reward, and he had accordingly done 
so. The Jew and the Christian were at first annoyed with 
him for thus stealing a march upon them; but on his point- 
ing out that he had no option but to obey the Prophet's 
commands, they admitted that he had done right, and that 
his dream was the best, as he had been awake, while they 
were asleep. The moral is, that the divine treasure is revealed 
as an immediate intuition to those who seek it with prayer 
and humble obedience, and not to those who seek to infer 
and deduce its nature and quality from the lofty abstrac- 
tions of philosophy. 

Lofty philosophical speculation does not lead 
to the knowledge of God. 

The Mosalman said, "O my friends, 

My lord, the Prophet Muhammad, appeared to me 

And said, 'The Jew has hurried to the top of Sinai, 

And plays a game of love with God's interlocutor; 

The Christian has been carried by 'Isa, Lord of bliss 

Up to the summit of the fourth heaven 

Thou who art left behind and hast endured anguish, 

Arise quickly and eat the sweetmeats and confections! 



449 
Book Six 

Those two clever and learned men have ascended, 

And read their titles of dignity and exaltation; 

Those two exalted ones have found exalted science, 

And rivaled the very angels in intellect; 

O humble and simple and despised one, 

Arise and eat of the banquet of the divine sweets!" 

They said to him, "Then you have been gluttonous; 

Well indeed! you have eaten all the sweets!" 

He answered, "When my sovereign lord commanded me, 

Who am I that I should abstain from obeying? 

Would you, O Jew, resist the commands of Moses 

If he bade you do something, either pleasant or not? 

Would you, O Christian, rebel against 'Isa's commands, 

Whether those commands were agreeable or the reverse? 

How could I rebel against the 'Glory of the prophets'? 

Nay, I ate the sweets, and am now happy." 

They replied, "By Allah, you have seen a true vision; 

Your vision is better than a hundred like ours. 

Your dream was seen by you when awake, O happy one, 

For it was seen to be real by your being awake." 

Quit excessive speculation and inordinate science, 

'Tis service of God and good conduct that gains its end. 

'Tis for this that God created us, 

"We created not mankind save to worship us" 

What profit did his science bring to Samiri? 

His science excluded him from God's portals. 



450 
The Masnavi 

Consider what Qarun gained by his alchemy; 

He was swallowed up in the depths of the earth. 

Abu-1 Jahl, again, what gained he from his wit 

Save to be hurled head-foremost into hell for infidelity? 

Know real science is seeing the fire directly, 

Not mere talk, inferring the fire from the smoke. 

Your scientific proofs are more offensive to the wise 

Than the urine and breath whence a physician infers. 

If these be your only proofs, O son, 

Smell foul breath and inspect urine like physicians. 

Such proofs are as the staff of a blind man, 

Which prove only the blindness of the holder. 

All your outcry and pompous claims and bustle 

Only say, "I cannot see, hold me excused!" 

This is illustrated be an anecdote of a peasant who, hear- 
ing a proclamation issued by the Prince of Tirmid, to the 
effect that a large reward would be given to him who should 
take a message to Samarcaud in the space of four days, hur- 
ried to Tirmid by relays of post-horses in the utmost haste, 
and threw the whole city into alarm, as the people thought 
that his extreme haste and bustle must portend the 
approach of an enemy or some other calamity. But when he 
was admitted to the presence of the prince, all he had to say 
was, that he had hurried to inform him that he could not go 
to Samarcand so quickly. The prince was very angry with 



451 
Book Six 

him for making all this disturbance about nothing, and 
threatened to punish him. 

The uses of chastisements. 

He said, "Alms of mercy repel calamity, 

Alms cure thy sickness, O son 

'Tis not charitable to burn up the poor, 

Or to put out the eyes of the meek." 

The prince replied, "Kindness is good in its place, 

Provided you do kindness in its proper place. 

If at chess you put the king in the rook's place 

That is wrong; and so if you put the knight in the king's, 

The law prescribes both rewards and chastisements. 

The king's place is the throne, the horse's the gate. 

What is justice but putting each in his place? 

What injustice but putting each in what is not his place? 

Nothing is vain of all that God has created, 

Whether vengeance or mercy, or plain dealing or snares. 

Not one of all these is good absolutely, 

Nor is any one of them absolutely bad. 

Each is harmful or beneficial according to its place, 

Wherefore knowledge of these points is proper and useful. 

Ah! many are the chastisements sent to the poor 

Which are more beneficial to him than bread and sweets; 

Because sweets out of season excite biliousness, 



452 
The Masnavi 

While blows make him pure from impurity. 

Strike the poor man timely blows, 

Which may save him from being beheaded later." 

The peasant, in reply, urged the prince not to be over 
hasty in punishing him, but to take counsel with suitable 
advisers, as enjoined in various texts, and in the Hadis pro- 
hibiting monkery, and warned him that if he shunned the 
advice and society of his equals he would assuredly be led 
astray by wretched companions. In illustration of this a 
story is told of a mouse who conceived a great affection for 
a frog living in a neighboring pond. That he might be able 
to communicate with his friend at all times, he fastened a 
string to the frog's leg, and the other end of it to his own. 
The proverb says, "Occasional intermission of visits aug- 

o 

ments love," but ardent lovers desire to be in communica- 
tion with the object of their love without intermission. The 
frog was at first unwilling to enter into such close relations 
with an animal of another species, but at last allowed him- 
self to be persuaded to do so, against his better judgment. 
Shortly afterwards a raven swooped down on the mouse and 
carried him off, and the frog, being fastened to the mouse, 
was dragged off and destroyed along with it. The raven's 
friends said to him, "How is it you managed to catch an ani- 
mal that lives in the water?" and he replied, "Because it was 
so silly as to consort with one of another species that lived 
on dry land." 



453 
Book Six 

Comparison of the body to the mouse, 
and the soul to the frog. 

The two friends discussed the matter long, 
And after discussion this plan was settled, 
That they should fetch a long string, 
By means of which to communicate with one another. 
The mouse said, "One end must be tied to your leg, 
And the other end to the leg of me, your double, 
That by this contrivance we two may be united, 
And be mingled together like soul and body." 

Body is like a string tied to sod's foot, 

That string drags soul down to earth. 

The soul is the frog in the water of ecstatic bliss; 

Escaping from the mouse of the body, it is in bliss. 

The mouse of the body drags it back with that string; 

Ah! what sorrow it tastes through being dragged back 

If it were not dragged down by that insolent mouse, 

The frog would remain at peace in its water. 

On the last day, when you shall awake from sleep, 

You will learn the rest of this from the Sun of truth! 

In illustration of the thesis that the sense which perceives 
the unseen and spiritual world is superior to the other sens- 
es, and is exempt from death and decay, the poet tells an 
anecdote of Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni and some robbers. 



454 
The Masnavi 

One night, when walking about the city alone, he fell in 
with a band of robbers. He told them he was one of them, 
and proposed that each should tell his own special talent. 
Accordingly one said he could hear what the dogs said when 
they barked; another that his sight was so good that when 
he saw a man at night he could recognize him without fail 
next day; another said his talent lay in the strength of his 
arms, whereby he dug holes through the walls of houses 
another said he could divine by his sense of smell where 
gold was hidden; another said his wrist was so strong that 
he could throw a rope farther than any one. At last it came 
to the turn of the king, and he told them that his talent lay 
in his beard, for when he wagged it he could deliver crimi- 
nals from the executioner. The robbers then went to the 
king's palace, and, each of them co-operating by the exercise 
of his peculiar talent, they broke into it, and plundered a 
large sum of money. The king, after witnessing the burglary, 
withdrew from them secretly, and, having summoned his 
Vazir, gave orders for their apprehension. No sooner were 
the robbers brought before the king than the one whose tal- 
ent lay in recognizing by day those whom he had seen in the 
darkness of night at once knew him, and said to the others, 
"This is the man who said his talent lay in his beard!" Thus 
the only one whose talent profited him at the time of need 
was he who could recognize by day what he had previously 
seen by night; for he appealed to the king to exercise his tal- 



455 
Book Six 



ent of deliverance, and the king listened to his entreaty, and 
delivered him from the executioner. 

He whose eyes discern God in the world 
is safe from destruction. 

He who, when he had once seen a person at night, 

Recognized him without fail when he saw him by day, 

Saw the king upon the throne, and straightway cried, 

"This was he who accompanied us on our nightly walk; 

This is he whose beard possessed such rare talent; 

Our arrest is due to his sagacity." 

He added, '"Yea, he was with you,' this great king; 

He beheld our actions and heard our secrets. 

My eyes guided me to recognize that king at night, 

And dwelt lovingly on his face, like the moon at night. 

Now, therefore, I will implore his grace for myself, 

For he will never avert his face from him that knew him." 

Know the eye of the ' Knower is a safeguard in both 

worlds, 
For therein ye will find a very Bahram to aid you. 
For this cause Muhammad was the intercessor for faults, 
Because his eye 'did not wander' from the King of kings. 
In the night of this world, when the sun is hidden, 
He beheld God, and placed his hopes on Him. 



456 
The Masnavi 

His eyes were anointed with the words, ' We opened thy 
heart,' 

12 

He beheld what Gabriel himself had not power to see." 

The story of the frog is concluded by the lamentations of 
the frog over his folly in consorting with an animal of a dif- 
ferent genus to his own, on which Reason warns him that 
homogeneity lies in spirit, not in outward form; and this is 
illustrated by an anecdote of a man named 'Abdul Ghaus, 
who was the son of a fairy mother, and consequently homo- 
geneous with the fairies, though only an ordinary man to 
outward appearance. 

Notes: 

1. Koran ii. 182. 

2. Koran ii. 56. 

3. Samiri, the maker of the golden calf. Qarun Koran. 

4. Freytag Arabum Proverbia, iii. 277. 

5. Koran lxvii. 22, iii. 155, xlii. 36. 

6. Koran xliii. 37. 

7. Anvari Suhaili, Chap. vii. Story III. 

8. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, i. 287. 

9. Koran lvii. 4. 

10. Koran liii. 17. 

1 1 . Koran xciv. 1 . 

12. Gulshan i Raz, I. 120. 



457 
Book Six 

STORY VIII. The Man who received a 
Pension from the Prefect of Tabriz. 

These reflections on the nothingness of outward form 
compared to spirit lead the poet to the corollary that often 
men whose outward forms are buried in the grave are 
greater benefactors to the poor and helpless than men still 
living in the body. This is illustrated by the story of the man 
who was maintained by the Prefect of Tabriz. This man 
incurred heavy debts on the credit of his pension, even as 
the Imam Ja'far Sadiq was able to capture a strong fort sin- 
gle-handed through the power of God assisting him. When 
the creditors became pressing the man journeyed to Tabriz 
to seek further aid; but on arriving there he found the 
Prefect was dead. On learning this he was much cast down, 
but eventually recognized that he had erred in looking to a 
creature instead of his Creator for aid, according to the text, 
"The infidels equalize others with their Lord." This obliq- 
uity of spiritual sight, causing him to see a mere human 
benefactor, where the real benefactor was God alone, is 
illustrated by anecdotes of a man buying bread at Kashan, 
of Sultan Khwarazm Shah deluded into disliking a fine 
horse by the interested advice of his Vazir, and of Joseph, 
who when imprisoned by Pharaoh was induced to trust for 
deliverance to the intercession of the chief butler rather 
than to God alone, for which cause "he remained several 
years in prison." A charitable person of Tabriz endeavoured 



458 
The Masnavi 

to raise funds for the poor man, and appealed to the citizens 
to aid him, but only succeeded in collecting a very small 
sum. He then visited the Prefect's tomb, and implored assis- 
tance from him; and the same night the Prefect appeared to 
him in a dream, and gave him directions where to find a 
great treasure, and directed him to make over this treasure 
to the poor man. Thus the dead Prefect proved a more lib- 
eral benefactor than the citizens of Tabriz who were still liv- 
ing. 

The poor man's regrets for having placed 
his trust in man and not in God. 

When he recovered himself he said, "O God, 

I have sinned in looking for aid to a creature! 

Although the Prefect showed great liberality, 

It was in no wise equal to Thy bounty. 

He gave me a cap, but Thou my head full of sense; 

He gave me a garment, but Thou my tall form. 

He gave me gold, but Thou my hand which counts it; 

He gave me a horse, but Thou my reason to guide it; 

He gave me a lamp, but Thou my lucid eyes; 

He gave me sweetmeats, but Thou my appetite for them; 

He gave me a pension, but Thou my life and being; 

His gift was gold, but Thine true blessings; 

He gave me a house, but Thou heaven and earth; 



459 
Book Six 

In Thy house he and a hundred like him are nourished. 
The gold was of Thy providing, he did not create it; 
The bread of Thy providing, and furnished to him by 

Thee. 
Thou also didst give him his liberality, 
For thereby Thou didst augment his happiness. 
I made him my Qibla, and directed my prayers to him; 
I turned away my eyes from Thee, the Qibla-maker! 
Where was he when the Supreme Dispenser of faith 
Sowed reason in the water and clay of man, 
And drew forth from Not-being this heavenly dome, 
And spread out the carpet of the earth? 
Of the stars He made torches to illumine the sky, 
And of the four elements locks with keys (of reason). 
Ah! many are the buildings visible and invisible 
Which God has made between heaven's dome and earth. 
Man is the astrolabe of those exalted attributes, 
The attribute of man is to manifest God's signs. 
Whatever is seen in man is the reflection of God, 
Even as the reflection of the moon in water." 

Say not two, know not two, call not on two! 
Know the slave is obliterated in his lord! 
So the lord is obliterated in God that created him 
Yea, lost and dead and buried in his Creator! 
When you regard this lord as separate from God, 



460 
The Masnavi 

You annihilate at once text and paraphrase. 

With eyes and heart look beyond mere water and clay, 

God alone is the Qibla; regard not two Qiblas! 

If you regard two you lose the benefit of both; 

A spark falls on the tinder and the tinder vanishes! 

Joseph kept in prison a long time for having placed 
his hopes of release in man and not in God. 

In like manner Joseph, in the prison, 

With humble and earnest supplications 

Begged aid, saying, "When you are released, 

And are occupied with your ministrations to the king, 

Remember me, and entreat the king 

To release rue too from this prison." 

How can one prisoner fettered in the snare 

Procure release for a fellow prisoner? 

The people of the world are all prisoners, 

Awaiting death on the stake of annihilation; 

Except one or two rare exceptions, 

Whose bodies are in prison but their souls in heaven. 



Afterwards, because Joseph had looked to man for aid, 
He remained in prison for many years. 
The Devil caused the man to forget Joseph, 



461 
Book Six 

And blotted Joseph's words from his remembrance; 
And on account of this fault of that holy man 
God left him in the prison for many years. 

Notes: 

1 . Koran vi. 1 . 

2. Koran xii. 42. 

3. Koran xii. 42. 



STORY IX. The King and his Three Sons. 

A certain king had three sons, who were the light of his 
eyes, and, as it were, a fountain whence the palm tree of his 
heart drank the water of bliss. One day he called his sons 
before him and commanded them to travel through his 
realm, and to inspect the behavior of the governors and the 
state of the administration; and he strictly charged them not 
to go near a particular fort which he named. But, according 
to the saying, "Man hankers after what is forbidden," the 
three princes disobeyed their father, and, before going any- 
where else, proceeded to visit this fort. The result was, that 
they fell into calamities, and had occasion to repeat the text, 
"Had we but hearkened or understood, we had not been 
among the dwellers in the flame." The fort was full of pic- 



462 
The Masnavi 

tures, images and forms, and amongst them was a portrait 
of a beautiful damsel, the daughter of the King of China, 
which made such a deep impression on the three princes 
that they all became distracted with love and determined to 
journey to the court of the King of China and sue for the 
hand of his daughter. 

The significance of forms. 

Be not intoxicated with these goblets of forms, 

Lest you become a maker and worshipper of idols. 

Pass by these cups full of forms, linger not; 

There is wine in the cups, but it proceeds not from them. 

Look to the Giver of the wine with open mouth; 

When His wine comes, is not cup too small to hold it? 

O Adam, seek the reality of my love, 

Quit the mere husk and form of the wheat. 

When sand was made meal for "The Friend of God," 

Know, O master, the form of wheat was dispensed with. 

Form proceeds from the world that is without form, 

Even as smoke arises from fire. 

The Divine art without form designs forms (ideals), 
Those forms fashion bodies with senses and instruments. 
Whatever the form, it fashions in its own likeness 
Those bodies either to good or to evil. 



463 
Book Six 

If the form be blessing, the man is thankful; 

If it be suffering, he is patient; 

If it be cherishing, he is cheerful; 

If it be bruising, he is full of lamentation! 

Since all these forms are slaves of Him without form, 
Why do they deny their Lord and Master? 
They exist only through Him that is without form; 
What, then, means their disavowal of their Sustainer? 
This very denial of Him proceeds from Him, 
This act is naught but a reflection from Himself! 
The forms of the walls and roofs of houses 
Know to be shadows of the architect's thought; 
Although stones and planks and bricks 
Find no entrance into the sanctuary of thought, 
Verily the Absolute Agent is without form, 
Form is only a tool in His hands. 
Sometimes that Formless One of His mercy 
Shows His face to His forms from behind the veil of Not- 
being, 
That every form may derive aid therefrom, 
From its perfect beauty and power. 
Again, when that Formless One hides His face, 
Those forms set forth their needs. 
If one form sought perfection from another form, 
That would be the height of error. 



464 
The Masnavi 

Why then, O simpleton, do you set forth your needs 

To one who is as needy as yourself? 

Since forms are slaves, apply them not to God, 

Seek not to use a form as a similitude of God. 

Seek Him with humbleness and self-abasement, 

For thought yields naught but forms of thought. 

Still, if you are unable to dispense with forms, 

Those occurring independently of your thought are best. 

The "Truth," which is our real self, lies hidden within our 
phenomenal and visible self, and the Prophets reveal it to 
us. 

"Now have we seen what the king saw at the first, 
When that Incomparable One adjured us." 

The prophets have many claims to our gratitude, 

Because they forewarn us of our ultimate lot, 

Saying, "What ye sow will yield only thorns; 

If ye fly that way, ye will fly astray. 

Take seed of us to yield you a good harvest, 

Fly with our wings to hit the mark with your arrow. 

Now ye know not the truth and nature of the 'Truth,' 

But at the last ye will cry, 'That was the "Truth."' 

The Truth is yourself, but not your mere bodily self, 

Your real self is higher than 'you' and 'me.' 



465 
Book Six 

This visible 'you' which you fancy to be yourself 
Is limited in place, the real you' is not limited. 
Why, O pearl, linger you trembling in your shell? 
Esteem not yourself mere sugar-cane, but real sugar. 
This outward 'you' is foreign to your real ' you;' 
Cling to your real self, quit this dual self. 
Your last self attains to your first (real) self 
Only through your attending earnestly to that union. 
Your real self lies hid beneath your outward self, 

o 

For 'I am the servant of him who looks into himself " 

"What a youth sees only when reflected in a glass, 

Our wise old fathers saw long ago though hid in stones. 

But we disobeyed the advice of our father, 

And rebelled against his affectionate counsels. 

We made light of the king's exhortations, 

And slighted his matchless intimations. 

Now we have all fallen into the ditch, 

Wounded and crushed in this fatal struggle. 

We relied on our own reason and discernment, 

And for that cause have fallen into this calamity. 

We fancied ourselves free from defects of sight, 

Even as those affected by color-blindness. 

Now at last our hidden disease has been revealed, 

After we have been involved in these calamities." 

"The shadow of a guide is better than directions to God, 



466 
The Masnavi 

To be satisfied is better than a hundred nice dishes. 
A seeing eye is better than a hundred walking-sticks, 
Eye discerns jewels from mere pebbles." 

The princes ascertained the name of the lady depicted in 
the fort from an old Shaikh, who warned them of the perils 
they would encounter on their journey to China, and told 
them that the King of China would not bestow his favor on 
those who tried to gain it by tricks and clever stratagems, 
but solely on those who were prepared to yield up their lives 
to him, according to the saying, "Die before you die." This 
is illustrated by an anecdote of a Chief of Bokhara, who 
made it a rule never to bestow his bounty on beggars who 
asked for it, but only on those who awaited his pleasure in 
silence. A certain Faqir tried many stratagems to evade this 
rule, but his craft was at once seen through by the Chief, 
and turned to his own confusion. The thesis that the 
unbought free grace of God is superior to any blessing 
obtainable by human exertion and contrivance is further 
illustrated by an absurd anecdote of two youths, one of 
whom trusted for protection to his own contrivance, and 
found it a broken reed. The Prophet said, "Two there are 
who are never satisfied the lover of the world and the lover 
of knowledge;" and he who loves knowledge will continue 
to trust in his knowledge, in spite of all exhortations and 
experience. But the eldest prince advised his brothers to risk 



467 
Book Six 

the perils and persevere in the journey, reminding them that 
"Patience is the key of joy." Accordingly they abandoned 
their country and their parents, like Ibrahim Adham, who 
renounced the throne of Balkh, and like the old Arabian 
king Amru'l Qais, who fled from the pursuit of his female 
adorers to seek the Spiritual Beloved in a far country. 

How the princes discoursed with one another in figurative 
language concerning their beloved mistress. 

They told their secrets to one another in dark sayings, 

Speaking beneath their breath in fear and trembling. 

None but God was privy to their secrets, 

None but Heaven was partner in their sighs. 

Yea, they used technical expressions one to another, 

And possessed intelligence to extract the sense. 

The vulgar learn the words of this "language of birds," 
And make boast of their mastery thereof; 
But these words are only the outward form of the lan- 
guage, 
The "raw" man is ignorant of the birds' meaning. 
He is the true Solomon who knows the birds' language, 
A demon, though he usurp his kingdom, is quite another. 
The demon has taken upon him the form of Solomon, 
His knowledge is fraud, not "what we have been taught." 



468 
The Masnavi 

When Solomon was blessed with inspiration from God, 

He learned birds' language from "what we were taught." 

But thou art only a bird of the air; understand then 

That thou hast never seen the true spiritual birds! 

The nest of the Simurgh is beyond Mount Qaf, 

Not every thought can attain thereto; 

Save thoughts which catch a glimpse thereof, 

And after the vision are again shut off. 

Yet not all shut off, rather intermitted for a wise end, 

For the blessing abides, though shut off and hidden! 

In order to preserve that body which is as a soul, 

The Sun is veiled for a while behind a cloud; 

In order not to melt that soul-like body, 

The Sun withdraws itself as from ice. 

For thy soul's sake seek counsel of these inspired ones. 

Ah! rob not their words of their technical meanings! 

Zulaikha applied to Yusuf the names of all things, 

Beginning with wild rue and ending with frankincense. 

She veiled his name under all other names, 

And imparted her secret meaning to her confidants. 

When she said, "The wax is melted by the fire," 

She meant, "My lover is wroth with me." 

So when she said, "See, the moon is risen!" 

Or, "Lo! the willow-bough is putting forth leaves;" 

Or if she said, "The leaves quiver in the wind," 



469 
Book Six 

Or, "The wild rue yields perfume as it burns;" 

Or if she said, "The rose tells her tale to the Bulbul," 

Or, "The king sings his love-strain;" 

Or if she said, "Ah! what a blessed lot!" 

Or, "Who hath disturbed my heart's repose?" 

Or if she said, "The water-carrier hath brought water,' 

Or, "Lo! the sun emerges from the clouds;" 

Or if she said, "Last night the victuals were boiled," 

Or, "The food was perfectly cooked;" 

Or if she said, "My bread is without savor" 

Or, "The heavens are revolving the wrong way; 

Or if she said, "My head aches with pain," 

Or, "My headache is now relieved;" 

If she gave thanks, 'twas for being united to Yusuf; 

If she wailed, 'twas that she was separated from him. 

Though she gave vent to thousands of names, 

Her meaning and purport was only Yusuf; 

Was she an hungred, when she pronounced his name, 

She became filled and cheered by his nourishment. 

Her thirst was quenched by Yusuf 's name, 

His name was spiritual water to her soul. 

Was she in pain, by pronouncing his mighty name 

At once her pain was turned into joy. 

In the cold it was a warm garment; 

Her lover's name accomplished all this through love. 

Strangers may pronounce the "pure name" of God, 



470 
The Masnavi 

Yet it effects no such marvels, for they lack love. 
All that 'Isa accomplished by the name of Jehovah, 
Zulaikha attained through the name "Yusuf." 
When the soul is intimately united with God, 
To name the one is the same as naming the other. 
Zulaikha was empty of self and filled with love of Yusuf, 
And there flowed out of her jar what it contained. 
The scent of the saffron of union made her smile, 
The stench of the onion of separation made her weep. 
Each to have in his heart a hundred meanings, 
Such is not the creed of true love and devotion. 
"The Friend" is to the lover as day to the sun, 
The material sun is a veil over the face of the real day. 
Whoso distinguishes not the veil from "The Friend's" face 
Is a worshipper of the sun; of such a one beware! 
"The Friend" is the real day, and daily food of lovers, 
The heart and the heart's torment of His lovers. 

After enduring many toils and misfortunes the three 
princes at last arrived in the metropolis of China, and there- 
upon the eldest prince expressed his intention of presenting 
himself before the king, as he could wait no longer. His 
brothers tried to dissuade him from risking his life, point- 
ing out that if he acted on blind impulse and vain conceit 
he would surely go astray, for "a conceit hath naught of 

12 
truth;" and they further urged him to listen to the coun- 



471 
Book Six 

sels of the Pir, or Spiritual Director. But the eldest brother 
refused to be dissuaded from his purpose, saying he would 
no longer hide his passion for his beloved, like one who 
beats a drum under a blanket, but would proclaim it open- 
ly, and take the risk of whatever might ensue. He added that 
he was convinced that he should obtain his desire in some 
way or other, if not in the way that he expected; according 
to the text, "Whoso feareth God, to him will he grant a 
prosperous issue, and will provide for him in a way he reck- 
oned not." Seekers after God fancy that He is far from 
them, and that they must travel far to reach Him; but these 
are both erroneous suppositions; and just as arithmeticians 
work out true answers to their problems by the "Method of 
Errors," so must the seekers of God from these errors 
work out the conviction that God is very nigh to them that 
call upon Him faithfully. To illustrate this an anecdote is 
told of a man of Baghdad who was in great distress, and 
who, after calling on God for aid, dreamt that a great trea- 
sure lay hid in a certain spot in Egypt. He accordingly jour- 
neyed to Egypt, and there fell into the hands of the patrol, 
who arrested him, and beat him severely on suspicion of 
being a thief. Calling to mind the proverb that "falsehood is 
a mischief but truth a remedy," he determined to confess 
the true reason of his coming to Egypt, and accordingly told 
them all the particulars of his dream. On hearing them they 
believed him, and one of them said, "You must be a fool to 



472 
The Masnavi 

journey all this distance merely on the faith of a dream. I 
myself have many times dreamt of a treasure lying hid in a 
certain spot in Baghdad, but was never foolish enough to go 
there." Now the spot in Baghdad named by this person was 
none other than the house of the poor man of Baghdad, and 
he straightway returned home, and there found the treasure. 
And he gave thanks, and recognized how "God causes ease 
to follow troubles," and how "Men hate what is good for 
them," and how God delays the answer to prayer, and 
allows men to remain poor and hungry for a season, in 
order to make them call upon Him, even as the Prophet 
said, "My servant is a lute which sounds best when it is 
empty." 

Why the answer to prayer is delayed. 

Ah! many earnest suppliants wail forth prayers, 

Till the smoke of their wailing rises to heaven; 

Yea, the perfume of the incense of sinners' groans 

Mounts up above the lofty roof of heaven. 

Then the angels supplicate God, saying, 

"O Thou that hearest prayer and relievest pain, 

Thy faithful slave is bowing down before Thee. 

He knows of none on whom to rely save Thee; 

Thou bestowest favors on the helpless. 

Every suppliant obtains his desire from Thee." 



473 
Book Six 

God makes answer, "The delay in granting his prayer 

Is intended to benefit him, not to harm him. 

His pressing need draws him from his negligence to me; 

Yea, drags him by the hair into my courts. 

If I at once remove his need he will go away, 

And will be destroyed in his idle sports. 

Though he is wailing with heartfelt cry of 'O Aider!' 

Bid him wail on with broken heart and contrite breast. 

His voice sounds sweet in my ears, 

And his wailing and cries of O God!' 

In this way by supplication and lamentation 

He prevails with me altogether." 

It is on account of their sweet voices 

That choice parrots and nightingales are jailed in cages. 

1 8 

Ugly owls and crows are never jailed in cages; 
Such a thing was never heard of in history. 

The disappointments of the pious, be sure, 
Are appointed for this wise purpose. 

The eldest brother then delayed no longer, but rushed 
into the presence of the King and kissed his feet. The King, 
like a good shepherd, was well aware of the troubles and 
cravings of his sheep. He knew that the prince had abjured 
earthly rank and dignity through love for his daughter, even 



474 
The Masnavi 

as a Sufi casts away his robe when overpowered by ecstatic 
rapture. The only reason why the prince had lagged behind 
in the race and not presented himself to the King before was 
that hitherto he had lacked the "inner eye" or spiritual sense 
which discerns spiritual verities, and had been consequent- 
ly blind to the King's perfections. They who lack this inner 
spiritual sense can no more appreciate spiritual pleasures 
than a man lacking the sense of smell can enjoy the perfume 
of flowers, or a eunuch the society of fair women. But his 
eyes had now been opened by the King's grace, and he had 
escaped from the bondage of worldly lusts and illusions, 
and, taught by experience, had resolved never again to be 
led captive by them. 

This is illustrated by the anecdote of the Qazi who was 
beguiled by the wife of a dwarf. The dwarf and his wife were 
very poor, and one day the dwarf said to his wife, "God has 
given you arched brows and arrowy glances and all manner 
of witchery; go and ensnare some rich man, so that we may 
extract money from him!" So the woman went to the court 
of the Qazi, pretending to have a grievance; and when she 
saw the Qazi she beguiled him, and induced him to pay her 
a visit at night. While the Qazi was sitting with her the 
dwarf returned home and knocked violently at the door, 
and the Qazi, in a great fright, hid himself in a large chest. 
The dwarf at once fetched a porter, and told him to take the 



475 
Book Six 

chest to the bazar and sell it. On the way to the bazar the 
Qazi cried out to the porter to fetch the Deputy; and when 
the Deputy came he redeemed the chest for one hundred 
Dinars, and thus the Qazi escaped. Next year the woman 
went to the court and tried to seduce the Qazi a second 
time; but he said, "Begone; I have escaped from your toils 
once, and will not fall into them again. The action of the 
Deputy in freeing the Qazi reminds the poet of the saying 
of the Prophet, "Of him, of whom I am the master, 'Ali also 
is master," and is therefore able to free him from slavery. 

The eldest prince at last fell sick of hope deferred, and 
gave up the ghost. But though he failed to obtain the King's 
daughter, the object of his earthly attachment, he obtained 
union with the King, the real spiritual object of his love, 
and the eternal fruition of dwelling in Him. 

The joys of union with the Spiritual Beloved 
are inexpressible in speech. 

In short, the King cherished him lovingly, 
And he like a moon waned in that sun. 
That waning of lovers makes them wax stronger, 
Just as the moon waxes brighter after waning. 
Ordinary sick persons crave a remedy for sickness 
But the lovesick one cries, "Increase my waning! 



476 
The Masnavi 

I have never tasted wine sweeter than this poison, 
No health can be sweeter than this sickness! 
No devotion is better than this sin (of love), 
Years are as a moment compared to this moment!" 

Long time he dwelt with the King in this manner, 
With burning heart, as a lively sacrifice. 

Thus his life passed, yet he gained not the union He 

wished. 
Patient waiting consumed him, his soul could not bear it; 
He dragged on life with pain and gnashing of teeth. 
At last life ended before he had attained his desire. 
The form of his earthly Beloved was hidden from him; 
He departed, and found union with his Spiritual Beloved. 
Then he said, "Though she lacks clothes of silk and wool, 
'Tis sweeter to embrace her without those veils. 
I have become naked of the body and its illusions, 
I am admitted into the most intimate union." 

The story admits of being told up to this point, 

Bat what follows is hidden and inexpressible in words. 

If you should speak and try a hundred ways to express it, 

'Tis useless; the mystery becomes no clearer. 

You can ride on saddle and horse up to the sea-coast, 

But then you must use a horse of wood (i.e., a boat). 



477 
Book Six 

A horse of wood is useless on dry land, 

It is the special conveyance of voyagers by sea. 

Silence is this horse of wood, 

Silence is the guide and support of men at sea. 

This Silence which causes you annoyance 

Is uttering cries of love audible to the spiritual. 

You say, "How strange the spiritual man is silent!" 

He answers, "How strange you have no ears! 

Though I utter cries, you hear them not; 

Sensual ears, however sharp, are deaf to my cries." 

The spiritual man, as it were, cries in his sleep, 

Uttering thousands of words of comfort; 

While the carnal man at his side hears nothing at all, 

For he is asleep, and deaf to the other's voice. 

But the perfect spiritualist who has broken his boat 
Plunges into the sea as a fish of the sea (of Truth). 
He is then neither silent nor speaking, but a mystery. 
No words are available to express his condition. 
That marvelous one is in neither of these states 
'Twould be irreverent to explain his state more fully. 
These illustrations are weak and inappropriate, 
But no fitter ones are obtainable from sensible objects. 

When the eldest prince died, the youngest was sick and 
could not come; but the second brother came to the court 



478 
The Masnavi 

to attend his funeral. There the King observed him, and 
took pity on him and entreated him kindly. He instilled 
into him spiritual knowledge of the verities hidden beneath 
phenomenal objects, and conveyed to him as deep a per- 
ception of spiritual truths as is not gained by a Sufi after 
years of fasting and retirement from the world. It is a fact, 
that when the pure spirit escapes from the bonds of the 
body, God gives it sight to behold the things of the spirit. 
The logician denies the possibility of this divine illumina- 
tion of the heart, but he is confuted by the Prophet, who 
swore "by the star" that the Koran was revealed to him by 
divine illumination. Those who cleave to their heresy 
(Bid'at) and obstinate unbelief are like to incur the punish- 
ment inflected on the tribe of 'Ad for disbelieving the 

20 
Prophet Hud. Earthly forms are only shadows of the Sun 

of the Truth, a cradle for babes, but too small to hold those 

who have grown to spiritual manhood. When the prince 

was thus nourished by the spiritual food given him by the 

King, which was such as the angels of heaven subsist upon, 

not the unspiritual food of Christians and those who give 

partners to God, he began to be puffed up with self-conceit, 

and forgot what he owed to the King, and rebelled against 

him. The King was cut to the heart by his ingratitude, 

which exactly resembled that of Nimrod. When Nimrod 

was an infant he was taken by his mother to sea, and the 

ship being wrecked, all that were in it perished, save only 



479 
Book Six 

the infant Nimrod who was saved through the pity of Izrail, 
the Angel of Death. God spared him, and nurtured him 
without the aid of mother or nurse; but when he grew up 
he proved ungrateful, and was puffed up with self-conceit 
and egotism, and showed enmity against God and Abraham 
His servant. When the prince found himself cast off by the 
King he came to himself, and repented and humbled him- 
self with deep contrition. The King then pardoned him; but 
his doom had already been decreed by God, and he was 
slain by the King he had injured, acknowledging the King's 
goodness to him with his latest breath. 

The death of the second prince. 

In short, the vengeance of That Jealous One (God) 

After one year bore him to the grave. 

When the King awoke out of his trance to consciousness, 

His Mars-like eyes shed tears of blood. 

When that incomparable one looked into his quiver, 

He saw that one of his arrow-shafts was missing. 

He cried to God, "What has become of my arrow?" 

God answered, "Thy arrow is fixed in his throat!" 

That King, bountiful as the sea, had pardoned him; 

Nevertheless his arrow had dealt him a mortal wound. 

He was slain, and cried out with his last breath, 

"The King is all in all, my slayer and my savior. 



480 
The Masnavi 

If he is not both these, he is not all in all; 

Nay, he is both my slayer and my mourner!" 

That expiring martyr also gave thanks, 

That the King had smitten his body, not his spirit; 

For the visible body must perforce perish, 

Ere the spirit can live in happiness for evermore. 

Though he incurred chastisement, it affected his body 

only, 
And as a friend he now goes, free of pain, to his Friend. 
Thus at first he clung to the King's stirrup, 
But at last went his way guided by perfect sight. 

Finally, the youngest brother, who was the weakest of all, 
succeeded where his brothers had failed, and obtained his 
earthly mistress, the king's daughter, as his bride, and the 
Spiritual Beloved as well. 

Here the Masnavi breaks off; but, according to the Bulaq 
edition, the following conclusion was supplied by Jalalu-'d- 
Din's son, Bahau-'d-Din Sultan Valad: 

Part of the story remains untold; it was retained 
In his mind and was not disclosed. 
The story of the princes remains unfinished, 
The pearl of the third brother remains unstrung. 
Here speech, like a camel, breaks down on its road; 



481 
Book Six 

I will say no more, but guard my tongue from speech. 
The rest is told without aid of tongue 
To the heart of him whose spirit is alive. 

Notes: 

1. Koran lxvii. 10. 

2. Surat, or "form," means picture, image, outward appearance 
as opposed to reality, conception or "form of thought," the 
"architypes" or "ideas" in the Divine mind, "the Substantial 
forms" of the Realist philosophy. Here the poet runs 
through nearly all these meanings. 

3. Sale's Koran, p. 75, note. 

4. i.e., the architypes in the "Intellectual Presence" or "world of 
command," which are afterwards set forth in the "world of 
creation or sensible objects. 

5. See Koran xlii. 9. 

6. i.e., the similitudes used in the Koran. 

7. " The Truth," Al Haqq, the Divine Noumenon. 

8. See Gulshan i Raz, Answer III., and the Hadis, "Whoso 
knows himself knows his Lord." 

9. Koran xxvii. 16. 

10. Simurgh, "Oiseau extraordinaire qui reside au Caucase," as 
M. Garcin de Tassy calls it, means "thirty birds" (Si murgh), 
and is used as a type of the Divine Unity which embraces all 
plurality. 



482 
The Masnavi 

1 1. i.e., the prophets and saints. 

12. Koran x. 37. 

13. Koran lxv. 2. 

14. i.e., "The Rule of Position. "Khulasat ul Hisab, Book iv. 

15. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, ii. 379. 

16. Koran ii. 213. 

17. Koran lxv. 7. 

18. i.e., hardened sinners like Pharaoh. 

19. Koran liii. 1. 

20. Koran xlvi. 20. 



Note on Apocryphal Supplements to the Masnavi. 

In the Lucknow edition there follows an epilogue written 
by Muhammad Ilahi Bakhsh, giving a continuation of the 
story of the third brother, but nothing of the kind is found 
in any of the other editions. 

The Bulaq edition adds a so-called Book VII., but this is 
known to be a comparatively recent forgery. Haji Khalfa 
says: "It is notorious that the Masnavi is contained in six 
books, but a seventh book has made its appearance, put 
forth by Ismail Dadah, the commentator. He also wrote a 
commentary on it, and therein replied with eloquence and 
strenuousness to those who denied its genuineness. He says 



483 
Book Six 

in his commentary that when he came to write out his fifth 
volume in the year 1035 A.H., he met with Book VII. in a 
copy of the Masnavi dated 814 A.H. He bought it and read 
it through, and was satisfied that it was undoubtedly a com- 
position of the author of the Masnavi. But the other 
Darveshes of the Maulavi order denied the genuineness of 
the Seventh Book." 

The contents of this Seventh Book consist of comments 
on various texts and traditions, illustrated by stories of no 
interest. They have nothing in common with the Epilogue 
of Muhammad Ilahi Bakhsh, found in the Lucknow edi- 
tion. 

Notes: 



lavi 
