Satan, being thus confined to a vagabond, wandering, unsettled condition, is 
without any certain abode; for though he has, in consequence of his angelic 
nature, a kind of empire in the liquid waste or air, yet this is certainly part of 
his punishment, that he is . . . without any fixed place, or space, allowed 
him to rest the sole of his foot upon. 
Daniel Defoe, _The History of the Devil_ 



I The Angel Gibreel 



"To be born again," sang Gibreel Farishta tumbling from the heavens, "first 
you have to die. Hoji! Hoji! To land upon the bosomy earth, first one needs 
to fly. Tat-taa! Taka-thun! How to ever smile again, if first you won't cry? 
How to win the darling's love, mister, without a sigh? Baba, if you want to 
get born again . . ." Just before dawn one winter's morning, New Year's Day 
or thereabouts, two real, full-grown, living men fell from a great height, 
twenty-nine thousand and two feet, towards the English Channel, without 
benefit of parachutes or wings, out of a clear sky. 

"I tell you, you must die, I tell you, I tell you," and thusly and so beneath a 
moon of alabaster until a loud cry crossed the night, "To the devil with your 
tunes," the words hanging crystalline in the iced white night, "in the movies 
you only mimed to playback singers, so spare me these infernal noises 
now." 

Gibreel, the tuneless soloist, had been cavorting in moonlight as he sang his 
impromptu gazal, swimming in air, butterfly-stroke, breast-stroke, bunching 
himself into a ball, spreadeagling himself against the almost-infinity of the 
almost-dawn, adopting heraldic postures, rampant, couchant, pitting levity 
against gravity. Now he rolled happily towards the sardonic voice. "Ohe, 
Salad baba, it's you, too good. What-ho, old Chumch." At which the other, a 
fastidious shadow falling headfirst in a grey suit with all the jacket buttons 
done up, arms by his sides, taking for granted the improbability of the 
bowler hat on his head, pulled a nickname-hater's face. "Hey, Spoono," 
Gibreel yelled, eliciting a second inverted wince, "Proper London, bhai! Here 
we come! Those bastards down there won't know what hit them. Meteor or 
lightning or vengeance of God. Out of thin air, baby. _Dharrraaammm!_ 
Wham, na? What an entrance, yaar. I swear: splat." 

Out of thin air: a big bang, followed by falling stars. A universal beginning, a 
miniature echo of the birth of time . . . the jumbo jet _Bostan_, Flight AI- 
420, blew apart without any warning, high above the great, rotting, beautiful, 
snow-white, illuminated city, Mahagonny, Babylon, Alphaville. But Gibreel 
has already named it, I mustn't interfere: Proper London, capital of Vilayet, 
winked blinked nodded in the night. While at Himalayan height a brief and 
premature sun burst into the powdery January air, a blip vanished from 
radar screens, and the thin air was full of bodies, descending from the 
Everest of the catastrophe to the milky paleness of the sea. 
Who am I? 
Who else is there? 

The aircraft cracked in half, a seed-pod giving up its spores, an egg yielding 
its mystery. Two actors, prancing Gibreel and buttony, pursed Mr. Saladin 
Chamcha, fell like titbits of tobacco from a broken old cigar. Above, behind, 
below them in the void there hung reclining seats, stereophonic headsets, 
drinks trolleys, motion discomfort receptacles, disembarkation cards, duty- 



free video games, braided caps, paper cups, blankets, oxygen masks. Also -- 
for there had been more than a few migrants aboard, yes, quite a quantity 
of wives who had been grilled by reasonable, doing-their-job officials about 
the length of and distinguishing moles upon their husbands' genitalia, a 
sufficiency of children upon whose legitimacy the British Government had 
cast its everreasonable doubts -- mingling with the remnants of the plane, 
equally fragmented, equally absurd, there floated the debris of the soul, 
broken memories, sloughed-off selves, severed mothertongues, violated 
privacies, untranslatable jokes, extinguished futures, lost loves, the 
forgotten meaning of hollow, booming words, _land_, _belonging_, _home_. 
Knocked a little silly by the blast, Gibreel and Saladin plummeted like 
bundles dropped by some carelessly open-beaked stork, and because 
Chamcha was going down head first, in the recommended position for babies 
entering the birth canal, he commenced to feel a low irritation at the other's 
refusal to fall in plain fashion. Saladin nosedived while Farishta embraced air, 
hugging it with his arms and legs, a flailing, overwrought actor without 
techniques of restraint. Below, cloud-covered, awaiting their entrance, the 
slow congealed currents of the English Sleeve, the appointed zone of their 
watery reincarnation. 

"O, my shoes are Japanese," Gibreel sang, translating the old song into 
English in semi-conscious deference to the uprushing host-nation, "These 
trousers English, if you please. On my head, red Russian hat; my heart's 
Indian for all that." The clouds were bubbling up towards them, and perhaps 
it was on account of that great mystification of cumulus and cumulo-nimbus, 
the mighty rolling thunderheads standing like hammers in the dawn, or 
perhaps it was the singing (the one busy performing, the other booing the 
performance), or their blast—delirium that spared them full foreknowledge of 
the imminent . . . but for whatever reason, the two men, Gibreelsaladin 
Farishtachamcha, condemned to this endless but also ending angelicdevilish 
fall, did not become aware of the moment at which the processes of their 
transmutation began. 
Mutation? 

Yessir, but not random. Up there in air-space, in that soft, imperceptible 
field which had been made possible by the century and which, thereafter, 
made the century possible, becoming one of its defining locations, the place 
of movement and of war, the planet-shrinker and power-vacuum, most 
insecure and transitory of zones, illusory, discontinuous, metamorphic, -- 
because when you throw everything up in the air anything becomes possible 
— wayupthere, at any rate, changes took place in delirious actors that would 
have gladdened the heart of old Mr. Lamarck: under extreme environmental 
pressure, characteristics were acquired. 

What characteristics which? Slow down; you think Creation happens in a 
rush? So then, neither does revelation . . . take a look at the pair of them. 
Notice anything unusual? Just two brown men, falling hard, nothing so new 



about that, you may think; climbed too high, got above themselves, flew too 
close to the sun, is that it? 
That's not it. Listen: 

Mr. Saladin Chamcha, appalled by the noises emanating from Gibreel 
Farishta's mouth, fought back with verses of his own. What Farishta heard 
wafting across the improbable night sky was an old song, too, lyrics by Mr. 
James Thomson, seventeenhundred to seventeen-forty-eight. ". . . at 
Heaven's command," Chamcha carolled through lips turned jingoistically 
redwhiteblue by the cold, "arooooose from out the aaaazure main." Farishta, 
horrified, sang louder and louder of Japanese shoes, Russian hats, inviolately 
subcontinental hearts, but could not still Saladin's wild recital: "And guardian 
aaaaangels sung the strain." 

Let's face it: it was impossible for them to have heard one another, much 
less conversed and also competed thus in song. Accelerating towards the 
planet, atmosphere roaring around them, how could they? But let's face this, 
too: they did. 

Downdown they hurtled, and the winter cold frosting their eyelashes and 
threatening to freeze their hearts was on the point of waking them from 
their delirious daydream, they were about to become aware of the miracle of 
the singing, the rain of limbs and babies of which they were a part, and the 
terror of the destiny rushing at them from below, when they hit, were 
drenched and instantly iced by, the degree-zero boiling of the clouds. 
They were in what appeared to be a long, vertical tunnel. Chamcha, prim, 
rigid, and still upside-down, saw Gibreel Farishta in his purple bush-shirt 
come swimming towards him across that cloud-walled funnel, and would 
have shouted, "Keep away, get away from me," except that something 
prevented him, the beginning of a little fluttery screamy thing in his 
intestines, so instead of uttering words of rejection he opened his arms and 
Farishta swam into them until they were embracing head-to-tail, and the 
force of their collision sent them tumbling end over end, performing their 
geminate cartwheels all the way down and along the hole that went to 
Wonderland; while pushing their way out of the white came a succession of 
cloudforms, ceaselessly metamorphosing, gods into bulls, women into 
spiders, men into wolves. Hybrid cloud-creatures pressed in upon them, 
gigantic flowers with human breasts dangling from fleshy stalks, winged cats, 
centaurs, and Chamcha in his semi-consciousness was seized by the notion 
that he, too, had acquired the quality of cloudiness, becoming metamorphic, 
hybrid, as if he were growing into the person whose head nestled now 
between his legs and whose legs were wrapped around his long, patrician 
neck. 

This person had, however, no time for such "high falutions"; was, indeed, 
incapable of faluting at all; having just seen, emerging from the swirl of 
cloud, the figure of a glamorous woman of a certain age, wearing a brocade 
sari in green and gold, with a diamond in her nose and lacquer defending her 



high-coiled hair against the pressure of the wind at these altitudes, as she 
sat, equably, upon a flying carpet. "Rekha Merchant," Gibreel greeted her. 
"You couldn't find your way to heaven or what?" Insensitive words to speak 
to a dead woman! But his concussed, plummeting condition may be offered 
in mitigation 

. . . Chamcha, clutching his legs, made an uncomprehending query: "What 
the hell?" 

"You don't see her?" Gibreel shouted. "You don't see her goddamn Bokhara 
rug?" 

No, no, Gibbo, her voice whispered in his ears, don't expect him to confirm. 
I am strictly for your eyes only, maybe you are going crazy, what do you 
think, you namaqool, you piece of pig excrement, my love. With death 
comes honesty, my beloved, so I can call you by your true names. 
Cloudy Rekha murmured sour nothings, but Gibreel cried again to Chamcha: 
"Spoono? You see her or you don't?" 

Saladin Chamcha saw nothing, heard nothing, said nothing. Gibreel faced 
her alone. "You shouldn't have done it," he admonished her. "No, sir. A sin. 
A suchmuch thing." 

O, you can lecture me now, she laughed. You are the one with the high 
moral tone, that's a good one. It was you who left me, her voice reminded 
his ear, seeming to nibble at the lobe. It was you, O moon of my delight, 
who hid behind a cloud. And I in darkness, blinded, lost, for love. 
He became afraid. "What do you want? No, don't tell, just go." 
When you were sick I could not see you, in case of scandal, you knew I 
could not, that I stayed away for your sake, but afterwards you punished, 
you used it as your excuse to leave, your cloud to hide behind. That, and 
also her, the icewoman. Bastard. Now that I am dead I have forgotten how 
to forgive. I curse you, my Gibreel, may your life be hell. Hell, because 
that's where you sent me, damn you, where you came from, devil, where 
you're going, sucker, enjoy the bloody dip. Rekha's curse; and after that, 
verses in a language he did not understand, all harshnesses and sibilance, in 
which he thought he made out, but maybe not, the repeated name _AI-Lat_. 
He clutched at Chamcha; they burst through the bottom of the clouds. 
Speed, the sensation of speed, returned, whistling its fearful note. The roof 
of cloud fled upwards, the water-floor zoomed closer, their eyes opened. A 
scream, that same scream that had fluttered in his guts when Gibreel swam 
across the sky, burst from Chamcha's lips; a shaft of sunlight pierced his 
open mouth and set it free. But they had fallen through the transformations 
of the clouds, Chamcha and Farishta, and there was a fluidity, an 
indistinctness, at the edges of them, and as the sunlight hit Chamcha it 
released more than noise: 

"Fly," Chamcha shrieked at Gibreel. "Start flying, now." And added, without 
knowing its source, the second command: "And sing." 
How does newness come into the world? How is it born? 



Of what fusions, translations, conjoinings is it made? 

How does it survive, extreme and dangerous as it is? What compromises, 

what deals, what betrayals of its secret nature must it make to stave off the 

wrecking crew, the exterminating angel, the guillotine? 

Is birth always a fall? 

Do angels have wings? Can men fly? 

When Mr. Saladin Chamcha fell out of the clouds over the English Channel 
he felt his heart being gripped by a force so implacable that he understood it 
was impossible for him to die. Afterwards, when his feet were once more 
firmly planted on the ground, he would begin to doubt this, to ascribe the 
implausibilities of his transit to the scrambling of his perceptions by the blast, 
and to attribute his survival, his and Gibreel's, to blind, dumb luck. But at 
the time he had no doubt; what had taken him over was the will to live, 
unadulterated, irresistible, pure, and the first thing it did was to inform him 
that it wanted nothing to do with his pathetic personality, that half- 
reconstructed affair of mimicry and voices, it intended to bypass all that, and 
he found himself surrendering to it, yes, go on, as if he were a bystander in 
his own mind, in his own body, because it began in the very centre of his 
body and spread outwards, turning his blood to iron, changing his flesh to 
steel, except that it also felt like a fist that enveloped him from outside, 
holding him in a way that was both unbearably tight and intolerably gentle; 
until finally it had conquered him totally and could work his mouth, his 
fingers, whatever it chose, and once it was sure of its dominion it spread 
outward from his body and grabbed Gibreel Farishta by the balls. 
"Fly," it commanded Gibreel. "Sing." 

Chamcha held on to Gibreel while the other began, slowly at first and then 
with increasing rapidity and force, to flap his arms. Harder and harder he 
flapped, and as he flapped a song burst out of him, and like the song of the 
spectre of Rekha Merchant it was sung in a language he did not know to a 
tune he had never heard. Gibreel never repudiated the miracle; unlike 
Chamcha, who tried to reason it out of existence, he never stopped saying 
that the gazal had been celestial, that without the song the flapping would 
have been for nothing, and without the flapping it was a sure thing that they 
would have hit the waves like rocks or what and simply burst into pieces on 
making contact with the taut drum of the sea. Whereas instead they began 
to slow down. The more emphatically Gibreel flapped and sang, sang and 
flapped, the more pronounced the deceleration, until finally the two of them 
were floating down to the Channel like scraps of paper in a breeze. 
They were the only survivors of the wreck, the only ones who fell from 
_Bostan_ and lived. They were found washed up on a beach. The more 
voluble of the two, the one in the purple shirt, swore in his wild ramblings 
that they had walked upon the water, that the waves had borne them gently 
in to shore; but the other, to whose head a soggy bowler hat clung as if by 
magic, denied this. "God, we were lucky," he said. "How lucky can you get?" 



I know the truth, obviously. I watched the whole thing. As to omnipresence 
and -potence, I'm making no claims at present, but I can manage this much, 
I hope. Chamcha willed it and Farishta did what was willed. 
Which was the miracle worker? 

Of what type -- angelic, satanic -- was Farishta's song? 
Who am I? 

Let's put it this way: who has the best tunes? 

These were the first words Gibreel Farishta said when he awoke on the 
snowbound English beach with the improbability of a starfish by his ear: 
"Born again, Spoono, you and me. Happy birthday, mister; happy birthday 
to you." 

Whereupon Saladin Chamcha coughed, spluttered, opened his eyes, and, as 
befitted a new-born babe, burst into foolish tears. 

2 

Reincarnation was always a big topic with Gibreel, for fifteen years the 
biggest star in the history of the Indian movies, even before he 
"miraculously" defeated the Phantom Bug that everyone had begun to 
believe would terminate his contracts. So maybe someone should have been 
able to forecast, only nobody did, that when he was up and about again he 
would sotospeak succeed where the germs had failed and walk out of his old 
life forever within a week of his fortieth birthday, vanishing, poof!, like a 
trick, _into thin air_. 

The first people to notice his absence were the four members of his film- 
studio wheelchair-team. Long before his illness he had formed the habit of 
being transported from set to set on the great D. W. Rama lot by this group 
of speedy, trusted athletes, because a man who makes up to eleven movies 
"sy-multaneous" needs to conserve his energies. Guided by a complex 
coding system of slashes, circles and dots which Gibreel remembered from 
his childhood among the fabled lunch-runners of Bombay (of which more 
later), the chair-men zoomed him from role to role, delivering him as 
punctually and unerringly as once his father had delivered lunch. And after 
each take Gibreel would skip back into the chair and be navigated at high 
speed towards the next set, to be re-costumed, made up and handed his 
lines. "A career in the Bombay talkies," he told his loyal crew, "is more like a 
wheelchair race with one-two pit stops along the route." 
After the illness, the Ghostly Germ, the Mystery Malaise, the Bug, he had 
returned to work, easing himself in, only seven pictures at a time . . . and 
then, justlikethat, he wasn't there. The wheelchair stood empty among the 
silenced sound-stages; his absence revealed the tawdry shamming of the 
sets. Wheelchairmen, one to four, made excuses for the missing star when 
movie executives descended upon them in wrath: Ji, he must be sick, he has 
always been famous for his punctual, no, why to criticize, maharaj, great 
artists must from time to time be permitted their temperament, na, and for 



their protestations they became the first casualties of Farishta's unexplained 
hey-presto, being fired, four three two one, ekdumjaldi, ejected from studio 
gates so that a wheelchair lay abandoned and gathering dust beneath the 
painted coco-palms around a sawdust beach. 

Where was Gibreel? Movie producers, left in seven lurches, panicked 
expensively. See, there, at the Willingdon Club golf links -- only nine holes 
nowadays, skyscrapers having sprouted out of the other nine like giant 
weeds, or, let's say, like tombstones marking the sites where the torn corpse 
of the old city lay -- there, right there, upper-echelon executives, missing 
the simplest putts; and, look above, tufts of anguished hair, torn from senior 
heads, wafting down from high-level windows. The agitation of the producers 
was easy to understand, because in those days of declining audiences and 
the creation of historical soap operas and contemporary crusading 
housewives by the television network, there was but a single name which, 
when set above a picture's title, could still offer a sure-fire, cent-per-cent 
guarantee of an Ultrahit, a Smashation, and the owner of said name had 
departed, up, down or sideways, but certainly and unarguably vamoosed . . . 
All over the city, after telephones, motorcyclists, cops, frogmen and trawlers 
dragging the harbour for his body had laboured mightily but to no avail, 
epitaphs began to be spoken in memory of the darkened star. On one of 
Rama Studios' seven impotent stages, Miss Pimple Billimoria, the latest 
chilli-and-spices bombshell -- _she's no flibberti-gibberti mamzel!, but a 
whir-stir-get-lost-sir bundla dynamite_ -- clad in temple—dancer veiled 
undress and positioned beneath writhing cardboard representations of 
copulating Tantric figures from the Chandela period, -- and perceiving that 
her major scene was not to be, her big break lay in pieces -- offered up a 
spiteful farewell before an audience of sound recordists and electricians 
smoking their cynical beedis. Attended by a dumbly distressed ayah, all 
elbows, Pimple attempted scorn. "God, what a stroke of luck, for Pete's 
sake," she cried. "I mean today it was the love scene, chhi chhi, I was just 
dying inside, thinking how to go near to that fatmouth with his breath of 
rotting cockroach dung." Bell-heavy anklets jingled as she stamped. "Damn 
good for him the movies don't smell, or he wouldn't get one job as a leper 
even." Here Pimple's soliloquy climaxed in such a torrent of obscenities that 
the beedi-smokers sat up for the first time and commenced animatedly to 
compare Pimple's vocabulary with that of the infamous bandit queen Phoolan 
Devi whose oaths could melt rifle barrels and turn journalists' pencils to 
rubber in a trice. 

Exit Pimple, weeping, censored, a scrap on a cutting-room floor. Rhinestones 
fell from her navel as she went, mirroring her tears. . . in the matter of 
Farishta's halitosis she was not, however, altogether wrong; if anything, she 
had a little understated the case. Gibreel's exhalations, those ochre clouds of 
sulphur and brimstone, had always given him -- when taken together with 
his pronounced widow's peak and crowblack hair -- an air more saturnine 



than haloed, in spite of his archangelic name. It was said after he 
disappeared that he ought to have been easy to find, all it took was a 
halfway decent nose . . . and one week after he took off, an exit more tragic 
than Pimple Billimoria's did much to intensify the devilish odour that was 
beginning to attach itself to that forsolong sweet-smelling name. You 
could .say that he had stepped out of the screen into the world, and in life, 
unlike the cinema, people know it if you stink. 

_We are creatures of air, Our roots in dreams And clouds, reborn In flight. 
Goodbye_. The enigmatic note discovered by the police in Gibreel Farishta's 
penthouse, located on the top floor of the Everest Vilas skyscraper on 
Malabar Hill, the highest home in the highest building on the highest ground 
in the city, one of those double-vista apartments from which you could look 
this way across the evening necklace of Marine Drive or that way out to 
Scandal Point and the sea, permitted the newspaper headlines to prolong 
their cacophonies. FARISHTA DIVES UNDERGROUND, opined _Blitz_ in 
somewhat macabre fashion, while Busybee in _The Daily_ preferred 
GIBREEL FLIES coop. Many photographs were published of that fabled 
residence in which French interior decorators bearing letters of 
commendation from Reza Pahlevi for the work they had done at Persepolis 
had spent a million dollars recreating at this exalted altitude the effect of a 
Bedouin tent. Another illusion unmade by his absence; GIBREEL STRIKES 
CAMP, the headlines yelled, but had he gone up or down or sideways? No 
one knew. In that metropolis of tongues and whispers, not even the 
sharpest ears heard anything reliable. But Mrs. Rekha Merchant, reading all 
the papers, listening to all the radio broadcasts, staying glued to the 
Doordarshan TV programmes, gleaned something from Farishta's message, 
heard a note that eluded everyone else, and took her two daughters and one 
son for a walk on the roof of her high-rise home. Its name was Everest Vilas. 
His neighbour; as a matter of fact, from the apartment directly beneath his 
own. His neighbour and his friend; why should I say any more? Of course 
the scandal-pointed malice-magazines of the city filled their columns with 
hint innuendo and nudge, but that's no reason for sinking to their level. Why 
tarnish her reputation now? 

Who was she? Rich, certainly, but then Everest Vilas was not exactly a 
tenement in Kurla, eh? Married, yessir, thirteen years, with a husband big in 
ball-bearings. Independent, her carpet and antique showrooms thriving at 
their prime Colaba sites. She called her carpets _klims_ and _kleens_ and 
the ancient artefacts were _anti-queues_. Yes, and she was beautiful, 
beautiful in the hard, glossy manner of those rarefied occupants of the city's 
sky-homes, her bones skin posture all bearing witness to her long divorce 
from the impoverished, heavy, pullulating earth. Everyone agreed she had a 
strong personality, drank Jike a fish_ from Lalique crystal and hung her hat 
_shameless_ on a Chola Natraj and knew what she wanted and how to get it, 
fast. The husband was a mouse with money and a good squash wrist. Rekha 



Merchant read Gibreel Farishta's farewell note in the newspapers, wrote a 
letter of her own, gathered her children, summoned the elevator, and rose 
heavenward (one storey) to meet her chosen fate. 

"Many years ago," her letter read, "I married out of cowardice. Now, finally, 
I'm doing something brave." She left a newspaper on her bed with Gibreel's 
message circled in red and heavily underscored -- three harsh lines, one of 
them ripping the page in fury. So naturally the bitch-journals went to town 
and it was all LOVELV'S LOVELORN LEAP, and BROKEN-HEARTED BEAUTY 
TAKES LAST DIVE. But: 

Perhaps she, too, had the rebirth bug, and Gibreel, not understanding the 
terrible power of metaphor, had recommended flight. _To be born again, first 
you have to_ and she was a creature of the sky, she drank Lalique 
champagne, she lived on Everest, and one of her fellow-Olympians had 
flown; and if he could, then she, too, could be winged, and rooted in dreams. 
She didn't make it. The lala who was employed as gatekeeper of the Everest 
Vilas compound offered the world his blunt testimony. "I was walking, here 
here, in the compound only, when there came a thud, _tharaap_. I turned. 
It was the body of the oldest daughter. Her skull was completely crushed. I 
looked up and saw the boy falling, and after him the younger girl. What to 
say, they almost hit me where I stood. I put my hand on my mouth and 
came to them. The young girl was whining softly. Then I looked up a further 
time and the Begum was coming. Her sari was floating out like a big balloon 
and all her hair was loose. I took my eyes away from her because she was 
falling and it was not respectful to look up inside her clothes." 
Rekha and her children fell from Everest; no survivors. The whispers blamed 
Gibreel. Let's leave it at that for the oment. Oh: don't forget: he saw her 
after she died. He saw her several times. It was a long time before people 
understood how sick the great man was. Gibreel, the star. Gibreel, who 
vanquished the Nameless Ailment. Gibreel, who feared sleep. 
After he departed the ubiquitous images of his face began to rot. On the 
gigantic, luridly coloured hoardings from which he had watched over the 
populace, his lazy eyelids started flaking and crumbling, drooping further 
and further until his irises looked like two moons sliced by clouds, or by the 
soft knives of his long lashes. Finally the eyelids fell off, giving a wild, 
bulging look to his painted eyes. Outside the picture palaces of Bombay, 
mammoth cardboard effigies of Gibreel were seen to decay and list. 
Dangling limply on their sustaining scaffolds, they lost arms, withered, 
snapped at the neck. His portraits on the covers of movie magazines 
acquired the pallor of death, a nullity about the eye, a hollowness. At last his 
images simply faded off the printed page, so that the shiny covers of 
_Celebrity_ and _Society_ and _Illustrated Weekly_ went blank at the 
bookstalls and their publishers fired the printers and blamed the quality of 
the ink. Even on the silver screen itself, high above his worshippers in the 
dark, that supposedly immortal physiognomy began to putrefy, blister and 



bleach; projectors jammed unaccountably every time he passed through the 
gate, his films ground to a halt, and the lamp-heat of the malfunctioning 
projectors burned his celluloid memory away: a star gone supernova, with 
the consuming fire spreading outwards, as was fitting, from his lips. 
It was the death of God. Or something very like it; for had not that outsize 
face, suspended over its devotees in the artificial cinematic night, shone like 
that of some supernal Entity that had its being at least halfway between the 
mortal and the divine? More than halfway, many would have argued, for 
Gibreel had spent the greater part of his unique career incarnating, with 
absolute conviction, the countless deities of the subcontinent in the popular 
genre movies known as "theologicals". It was part of the magic of his 
persona that he succeeded in crossing religious boundaries without giving 
offence. Blue-skinned as Krishna he danced, flute in hand, amongst the 
beauteous gopis and their udder-heavy cows; with upturned palms, serene, 
he meditated (as Gautama) upon humanity's suffering beneath a studio- 
rickety bodhi-tree. On those infrequent occasions when he descended from 
the heavens he never went too far, playing, for example, both the Grand 
Mughal and his famously wily minister in the classic _Akbar and Birbal_. For 
over a decade and a half he had represented, to hundreds of millions of 
believers in that country in which, to this day, the human population 
outnumbers the divine by less than three to one, the most acceptable, and 
instantly recognizable, face of the Supreme. For many of his fans, the 
boundary separating the performer and his roles had longago ceased to exist. 
The fans, yes, and? How about Gibreel? 

That face. In real life, reduced to life-size, set amongst ordinary mortals, it 
stood revealed as oddly un-starry. Those low-slung eyelids could give him an 
exhausted look. There was, too, something coarse about the nose, the 
mouth was too well fleshed to be strong, the ears were long-lobed like 
young, knurled jackfruit. The most profane of faces, the most sensual of 
faces. In which, of late, it had been possible to make out the seams mined 
by his recent, near-fatal illness. And yet, in spite of profanity and debilitation, 
this was a face inextricably mixed up with holiness, perfection, grace: God 
stuff. No accounting for tastes, that's all. At any rate, you'll agree that for 
such an actor (for any actor, maybe, even for Chamcha, but most of all for 
him) to have a bee in his bonnet about avatars, like much-metamorphosed 
Vishnu, was not so very surprising. Rebirth: that's God stuff, too. 
Or, but, then again . . . not always. There are secular reincarnations, too. 
Gibreel Farishta had been born Ismail Najmuddin in Poona, British Poona at 
the empire's fag-end, long before the Pune of Rajneesh etc. (Pune, Vadodara, 
Mumbai; even towns can take stage names nowadays.) Ismail after the child 
involved in the sacrifice of Ibrahim, and Najmuddin, _star of the faith_; he'd 
given up quite a name when he took the angel's. 

Afterwards, when the aircraft _Bostan_ was in the grip of the hijackers, and 
the passengers, fearing for their futures, were regressing into their pasts, 



Gibreel confided to Saladin Chamcha that his choice of pseudonym had been 
his way of making a homage to the memory of his dead mother, "my 
mummyji, Spoono, my one and only Mamo, because who else was it who 
started the whole angel business, her personal angel, she called me, 
_farishta_, because apparently I was too damn sweet, believe it or not, I 
was good as goddamn gold." 

Poona couldn't hold him; he was taken in his infancy to the bitch-city, his 
first migration; his father got a job amongst the fleet-footed inspirers of 
future wheelchair quartets, the lunch-porters or dabbawallas of Bombay. 
And Ismail the farishta followed, at thirteen, in his father's footsteps. 
Gibreel, captive aboard AI-420, sank into forgivable rhapsodies, fixing 
Chamcha with his glittering eye, explicating the mysteries of the runners' 
coding system, black swastika red circle yellow slash dot, running in his 
mind's eye the entire relay from home to office desk, that improbable 
system by which two thousand dabbawallas delivered, each day, over one 
hundred thousand lunch-pails, and on a bad day, Spoono, maybe fifteen got 
mislaid, we were illiterate, mostly, but the signs were our secret tongue. 
_Bostan_ circled London, gunmen patrolling the gangways, and the lights in 
the passenger cabins had been switched off, but Gibreel's energy illuminated 
the gloom. On the grubby movie screen on which, earlier in the journey, the 
inflight inevitability of Walter Matthau had stumbled lugubriously into the 
aerial ubiquity of Goldie Hawn, there were shadows moving, projected by the 
nostalgia of the hostages, and the most sharply defined of them was this 
spindly adolescent, Ismail Najmuddin, mummy's angel in a Gandhi cap, 
running tiffins across the town. The young dabbawalla skipped nimbly 
through the shadow-crowd, because he was used to such conditions, think, 
Spoono, picture, thirty-forty tiffins in a long wooden tray on your head, and 
when the local train stops you have maybe one minute to push on or off, 
and then running in the streets, flat out, yaar, with the trucks buses scooters 
cycles and what-all, one-two, one-two, lunch, lunch, the dabbas must get 
through, and in the monsoon running down the railway line when the train 
broke down, or waist-deep in water in some flooded street, and there were 
gangs, Salad baba, truly, organized gangs of dabba-stealers, it's a hungry 
city, baby, what to tell you, but we could handle them, we were everywhere, 
knew everything, what thieves could escape our eyes and ears, we never 
went to any policia, we looked after our own. 

At night father and son would return exhausted to their shack by the airport 
runway at Santacruz and when Ismail's mother saw him approaching, 
illuminated by the green red yellow of the departing jet-planes, she would 
say that simply to lay eyes on him made all her dreams come true, which 
was the first indication that there was something peculiar about Gibreel, 
because from the beginning, it seemed, he could fulfil people's most secret 
desires without having any idea of how he did it. His father Najmuddin 
Senior never seemed to mind that his wife had eyes only for her son, that 



the boy's feet received nightly pressings while the father's went unstroked. A 
son is a blessing and a blessing requires the gratitude of the blest. 
Naima Najmuddin died. A bus hit her and that was that, Gibreel wasn't 
around to answer her prayers for life. Neither father nor son ever spoke of 
grief. Silently, as though it were customary and expected, they buried their 
sadness beneath extra work, engaging in an inarticulate contest, who could 
carry the most dabbas on his head, who could acquire the most new 
contracts per month, who could run faster, as though the greater labour 
would indicate the greater love. When he saw his father at night, the knotted 
veins bulging in his neck and at his temples, Ismail Najmuddin would 
understand how much the older man had resented him, and how important 
it was for the father to defeat the son and regain, thereby, his usurped 
primacy in the affections of his dead wife. Once he realized this, the youth 
eased off, but his father's zeal remained unrelenting, and pretty soon he was 
getting promotion, no longer a mere runner but one of the organizing 
muqaddams. When Gibreel was nineteen, Najmuddin Senior became a 
member of the lunch-runners' guild, the Bombay Tiffin Carriers' Association, 
and when Gibreel was twenty, his father was dead, stopped in his tracks by 
a stroke that almost blew him apart. "He just ran himself into the ground," 
said the guild's General Secretary, Babasaheb Mhatre himself. "That poor 
bastard, he just ran out of steam." But the orphan knew better. He knew 
that his father had finally run hard enough and long enough to wear down 
the frontiers between the worlds, he had run clear out of his skin and into 
the arms of his wife, to whom he had proved, once and for all, the 
superiority of his love. Some migrants are happy to depart. 
Babasaheb Mhatre sat in a blue office behind a green door above a 
labyrinthine bazaar, an awesome figure, buddha-fat, one of the great 
moving forces of the metropolis, possessing the occult gift of remaining 
absolutely still, never shifting from his room, and yet being everywhere 
important and meeting everyone who mattered in Bombay. The day after 
young Ismail's father ran across the border to see Naima, the Babasaheb 
summoned the young man into his presence. "So? Upset or what?" The reply, 
with downcast eyes: ji, thank you, Babaji, I am okay. "Shut your face," said 
Babasaheb Mhatre. "From today you live with me." Butbut, Babaji ... "But 
me no buts. Already I have informed my goodwife. I have spoken." Please 
excuse Babaji but how what why? "I have _spoken_." 
Gibreel Farishta was never told why the Babasaheb had decided to take pity 
on him and pluck him from the futurelessness of the streets, but after a 
while he began to have an idea. Mrs. Mhatre was a thin woman, like a pencil 
beside the rubbery Babasaheb, but she was filled so full of mother-love that 
she should have been fat like a potato. When the Baba came home she put 
sweets into his mouth with her own hands, and at nights the newcomer to 
the household could hear the great General Secretary of the B T C A 
protesting, Let me go, wife, I can undress myself. At breakfast she spoon- 



fed Mhatre with large helpings of malt, and before he went to work she 
brushed his hair. They were a childless couple, and young Najmuddin 
understood that the Babasaheb wanted him to share the load. Oddly enough, 
however, the Begum did not treat the young man as a child. "You see, he is 
a grown fellow," she told her husband when poor Mhatre pleaded, "Give the 
boy the blasted spoon of malt." Yes, a grown fellow, "we must make a man 
of him, husband, no babying for him." "Then damn it to hell," the Babasaheb 
exploded, "why do you do it to me?" Mrs. Mhatre burst into tears. "But you 
are everything to me," she wept, "you are my father, my lover, my baby too. 
You are my lord and my suckling child. If I displease you then I have no 
life." 

Babasaheb Mhatre, accepting defeat, swallowed the tablespoon of malt. 
He was a kindly man, which he disguised with insults and noise. To console 
the orphaned youth he would speak to him, in the blue office, about the 
philosophy of rebirth, convincing him that his parents were already being 
scheduled for re-entry somewhere, unless of course their lives had been so 
holy that they had attained the final grace. So it was Mhatre who started 
Farishta off on the whole reincarnation business, and not just reincarnation. 
The Babasaheb was an amateur psychic, a tapper of table-legs and a bringer 
of spirits into glasses. "But I gave that up," he told his protege, with many 
suitably melodramatic inflections, gestures, frowns, "after I got the fright of 
my bloody life." 

Once (Mhatre recounted) the glass had been visited by the most co- 
operative of spirits, such a too-friendly fellow, see, so I thought to ask him 
some big questions. _Is there a God_, and that glass which had been 
running round like a mouse or so just stopped dead, middle of table, not a 
twitch, completely phutt, kaput. So, then, okay, I said, if you won't answer 
that try this one instead, and I came right out with it, _Is there a Devil_. 
After that the glass -- baprebap! -- began to shake -- catch your ears! -- 
slowslow at first, then faster- -faster, like a jelly, until it jumped! -- ai-hai! -- 
up from the table, into the air, fell down on its side, and -- o-ho! -- into a 
thousand and one pieces, smashed. Believe don't believe, Babasaheb Mhatre 
told his charge, but thenandthere I learned my lesson: don't meddle, Mhatre, 
in what you do not comprehend. 

This story had a profound effect on the consciousness of the young listener, 
because even before his mother's death he had become convinced of the 
existence of the supernatural world. Sometimes when he looked around him, 
especially in the afternoon heat when the air turned glutinous, the visible 
world, its features and inhabitants and things, seemed to be sticking up 
through the atmosphere like a profusion of hot icebergs, and he had the idea 
that everything continued down below the surface of the soupy air: people, 
motor-cars, dogs, movie billboards, trees, nine-tenths of their reality 
concealed from his eyes. He would blink, and the illusion would fade, but the 
sense of it never left him. He grew up believing in God, angels, demons, 



afreets, djinns, as matter-of-factly as if they were bullock-carts or lamp- 
posts, and it struck him as a failure in his own sight that he had never seen 
a ghost. He would dream of discovering a magic optometrist from whom he 
would purchase a pair of greentinged spectacles which would correct his 
regrettable myopia, and after that he would be able to see through the 
dense, blinding air to the fabulous world beneath. 

From his mother Naima Najmuddin he heard a great many stories of the 
Prophet, and if inaccuracies had crept into her versions he wasn't interested 
in knowing what they were. "What a man!" he thought. "What angel would 
not wish to speak to him?" Sometimes, though, he caught himself in the act 
of forming blasphemous thoughts, for example when without meaning to, as 
he drifted off to sleep in his cot at the Mhatre residence, his somnolent fancy 
began to compare his own condition with that of the Prophet at the time 
when, having been orphaned and short of funds, he made a great success of 
his job as the business manager of the wealthy widow Khadija, and ended 
up marrying her as well. As he slipped into sleep he saw himself sitting on a 
rose-strewn dais, simpering shyly beneath the sari-pallu which he had 
placed demurely over his face, while his new husband, Babasaheb Mhatre, 
reached lovingly towards him to remove the fabric, and gaze at his features 
in a mirror placed in his lap. This dream of marrying the Babasaheb brought 
him awake, flushing hotly for shame, and after that he began to worry about 
the impurity in his make-up that could create such terrible visions. 
Mostly, however, his religious faith was a low-key thing, a part of him that 
required no more special attention than any other. When Babasaheb Mhatre 
took him into his home it confirmed to the young man that he was not alone 
in the world, that something was taking care of him, so he was not entirely 
surprised when the Babasaheb called him into the blue office on the morning 
of his twenty-first birthday and sacked him without even being prepared to 
listen to an appeal. 

"You're fired," Mhatre emphasized, beaming. "Cashiered, had your chips. 
Dis-_miss_." 
"But, uncle," 
"Shut your face." 

Then the Babasaheb gave the orphan the greatest present of his life, 
informing him that a meeting had been arranged for him at the studios of 
the legendary film magnate Mr. D. W. Rama; an audition. "It is for 
appearance only," the Babasaheb said. "Rama is my good friend and we 
have discussed. A small part to begin, then it is up to you. Now get out of 
my sight and stop pulling such humble faces, it does not suit." 
"But, uncle," 

"Boy like you is too damn goodlooking to carry tiffins on his head all his life. 
Get gone now, go, be a homosexual movie actor. I fired you five minutes 
back." 

"But, uncle," 



"I have spoken. Thank your lucky stars." 

He became Gibreel Farishta, but for four years he did not become a star, 
serving his apprenticeship in a succession of minor knockabout comic parts. 
He remained calm, unhurried, as though he could see the future, and his 
apparent lack of ambition made him something of an outsider in that most 
self-seeking of industries. He was thought to be stupid or arrogant or both. 
And throughout the four wilderness years he failed to kiss a single woman 
on the mouth. 

On-screen, he played the fall guy, the idiot who loves the beauty and can't 
see that she wouldn't go for him in a thousand years, the funny uncle, the 
poor relation, the village idiot, the servant, the incompetent crook, none of 
them the type of part that ever rates a love scene. Women kicked him, 
slapped him, teased him, laughed at him, but never, on celluloid, looked at 
him or sang to him or danced around him with cinematic love in their eyes. 
Off-screen, he lived alone in two empty rooms near the studios and tried to 
imagine what women looked like without clothes on. To get his mind off the 
subject of love and desire, he studied, becoming an omnivorous autodidact, 
devouring the metamorphic myths of Greece and Rome, the avatars of 
Jupiter, the boy who became a flower, the spider-woman, Circe, everything; 
and the theosophy of Annie Besant, and unified field theory, and the incident 
of the Satanic verses in the early career of the Prophet, and the politics of 
uhammad's harem after his return to Mecca in triumph; and the surrealism 
of the newspapers, in which butterflies could fly into young girls' mouths, 
asking to be consumed, and children were born with no faces, and young 
boys dreamed in impossible detail of earlier incarnations, for instance in a 
golden fortress filled with precious stones. He filled himself up with God 
knows what, but he could not deny, in the small hours of his insomniac 
nights, that he was full of something that had never been used, that he did 
not know how to begin to use, that is, love. In his dreams he was tormented 
by women of unbearable sweetness and beauty, so he preferred to stay 
awake and force himself to rehearse some part of his general knowledge in 
order to blot out the tragic feeling of being endowed with a larger-than-usual 
capacity for love, without a single person on earth to offer it to. 
His big break arrived with the coming of the theological movies. Once the 
formula of making films based on the puranas, and adding the usual mixture 
of songs, dances, funny uncles etc., had paid off, every god in the pantheon 
got his or her chance to be a star. When D. W. Rama scheduled a production 
based on the story of Ganesh, none of the leading box-office names of the 
time were willing to spend an entire movie concealed inside an elephant's 
head. Gibreel jumped at the chance. That was his first hit, _Ganpati Baba_, 
and suddenly he was a superstar, but only with the trunk and ears on. After 
six movies playing the elephantheaded god he was permitted to remove the 
thick, pendulous, grey mask and put on, instead, a long, hairy tail, in order 
to play Hanuman the monkey king in a sequence of adventure movies that 



owed more to a certain cheap television series emanating from Hong Kong 
than it did to the Ramayana. This series proved so popular that monkey-tails 
became de rigueur for the city's young bucks at the kind of parties 
frequented by convent girls known as "firecrackers" because of their 
readiness to go off with a bang. 

After Hanuman there was no stopping Gibreel, and his phenomenal success 
deepened his belief in a guardian angel. But it also led to a more regrettable 
development. 

(I see that I must, after all, spill poor Rekha's beans.) 
Even before he replaced false head with fake tail he had become irresistibly 
attractive to women. The seductions of his fame had grown so great that 
several of these young ladies asked him if he would keep the Ganesh-mask 
on while they made love, but he refused out of respect for the dignity of the 
god. Owing to the innocence of his upbringing he could not at that time 
differentiate between quantity and quality and accordingly felt the need to 
make up for lost time. He had so many sexual partners that it was not 
uncommon for him to forget their names even before they had left his room. 
Not only did he become a philanderer of the worst type, but he also learned 
the arts of dissimulation, because a man who plays gods must be above 
reproach. So skilfully did he conceal his life of scandal and debauch that his 
old patron, Babasaheb Mhatre, lying on his deathbed a decade after he sent 
a young dabbawalla out into the world of illusion, black-money and lust, 
begged him to get married to prove he was a man. "God-sake, mister," the 
Babasaheb pleaded, "when I told you back then to go and be a homo I never 
thought you would take me seriously, there is a limit to respecting one's 
elders, after all." Gibreel threw up his hands and swore that he was no such 
disgraceful thing, and that when the right girl came along he would of course 
undergo nuptials with a will. "What you waiting? Some goddess from heaven? 
Greta Garbo, Gracekali, who?" cried the old man, coughing blood, but 
Gibreel left him with the enigma of a smile that allowed him to die without 
having his mind set entirely at rest. 

The avalanche of sex in which Gibreel Farishta was trapped managed to bury 
his greatest talent so deep that it might easily have been lost forever, his 
talent, that is, for loving genuinely, deeply and without holding back, the 
rare and delicate gift which he had never been able to employ. By the time 
of his illness he had all but forgotten the anguish he used to experience 
owing to his longing for love, which had twisted and turned in him like a 
sorcerer's knife. Now, at the end of each gymnastic night, he slept easily 
and long, as if he had never been plagued by dream-women, as if he had 
never hoped to lose his heart. 

"Your trouble," Rekha Merchant told him when she materialized out of the 
clouds, "is everybody always forgave you, God knows why, you always got 
let off, you got away with murder. Nobody ever held you responsible for 
what you did." He couldn't argue. "God's gift," she screamed at him, "God 



knows where you thought you were from, jumped-up type from the gutter, 
God knows what diseases you brought." 

But that was what women did, he thought in those days, they were the 
vessels into which he could pour himself, and when he moved on, they 
would understand that it was his nature, and forgive. And it was true that 
nobody blamed him for leaving, for his thousand and one pieces of 
thoughtlessness, how many abortions, Rekha demanded in the cloud-hole, 
how many broken hearts. In all those years he was the beneficiary of the 
infinite generosity of women, but he was its victim, too, because their 
forgiveness made possible the deepest and sweetest corruption of all, 
namely the idea that he was doing nothing wrong. 

Rekha: she entered his life when he bought the penthouse at Everest Vilas 
and she offered, as a neighbour and businesswoman, to show him her 
carpets and antiques. Her husband was at a world-wide congress of ball- 
bearings manufacturers in Gothenburg, Sweden, and in his absence she 
invited Gibreel into her apartment of stone lattices from Jaisalmer and 
carved wooden handrails from Kcralan palaces and a stone Mughal chhatri or 
cupola turned into a whirlpool bath; while she poured him French 
champagne she leaned against marbled walls and felt the cool veins of the 
stone against her back. When he sipped the champagne she teased him, 
surely gods should not partake of alcohol, and he answered with a line he 
had once read in an interview with the Aga Khan, O, you know, this 
champagne is only for outward show, the moment it touches my lips it turns 
to water. After that it didn't take long for her to touch his lips and deliquesce 
into his arms. By the time her children returned from school with the ayah 
she was immaculately dressed and coiffed, and sat with him in the drawing- 
room, revealing the secrets of the carpet business, confessing that art silk 
stood for artificial not artistic, telling him not to be fooled by her brochure in 
which a rug was seductively described as being made of wool plucked from 
the throats of baby lambs, which means, you see, only _low-grade wool_, 
advertising, what to do, this is how it is. 

He did not love her, was not faithful to her, forgot her birthdays, failed to 
return her phone calls, turned up when it was most inconvenient owing to 
the presence in her home of dinner guests from the world of the ball-bearing, 
and like everyone else she forgave him. But her forgiveness was not the 
silent, mousy let-off he got from the others. Rekha complained like crazy, 
she gave him hell, she bawled him out and cursed him for a useless lafanga 
and haramzada and salah and even, in extremis, for being guilty of the 
impossible feat of fucking the sister he did not have. She spared him nothing, 
accusing him of being a creature of surfaces, like a movie screen, and then 
she went ahead and forgave him anyway and allowed him to unhook her 
blouse. Gibreel could not resist the operatic forgiveness of Rekha Merchant, 
which was all the more moving on account of the flaw in her own position, 
her infidelity to the ball-bearing king, which Gibreel forbore to mention, 



taking his verbal beatings like a man. So that whereas the pardons he got 
from the rest of his women left him cold and he forgot them the moment 
they were uttered, he kept coming back to Rekha, so that she could abuse 
him and then console him as only she knew how. 
Then he almost died. 

He was filming at Kanya Kumari, standing on the very tip of Asia, taking part 
in a fight scene set at the point on Cape Comorin where it seems that three 
oceans are truly smashing into one another. Three sets of waves rolled in 
from the west east south and collided in a mighty clapping of watery hands 
just as Gibreel took a punch on the jaw, perfect timing, and he passed out 
on the spot, falling backwards into tri-oceanic spume. He did not get up. To 
begin with everybody blamed the giant English stunt-man Eustace Brown, 
who had delivered the punch. He protested vehemently. Was he not the 
same fellow who had performed opposite Chief Minister N. T. Rama Rao in 
his many theological movie roles? Had he not perfected the art of making 
the old man look good in combat without hurting him? Had he ever 
complained that NTR never pulled his punches, so that he, Eustace, 
invariably ended up black and blue, having been beaten stupid by a little old 
guy whom he could've eaten for breakfast, on _toast_, and had he ever, 
even once, lost his temper? Well, then? How could anyone think he would 
hurt the immortal Gibreel? -- They fired him anyway and the police put him 
in the lock-up, just in case. 

But it was not the punch that had flattened Gibreel. After the star had been 
flown into Bombay's Breach Candy Hospital in an Air Force jet made 
available for the purpose; after exhaustive tests had come up with almost 
nothing; and while he lay unconscious, dying, with a blood-count that had 
fallen from his normal fifteen to a murderous four point two, a hospital 
spokesman faced the national press on Breach Candy's wide white steps. "It 
is a freak mystery," he gave out. "Call it, if you so please, an act of God." 
Gibreel Farishta had begun to haemorrhage all over his insides for no 
apparent reason, and was quite simply bleeding to death inside his skin. At 
the worst moment the blood began to seep out through his rectum and penis, 
and it seemed that at any moment it might burst torrentially through his 
nose and ears and out of the corners of his eyes. For seven days he bled, 
and received transfusions, and every clotting agent known to medical 
science, including a concentrated form of rat poison, and although the 
treatment resulted in a marginal improvement the doctors gave him up for 
lost. 

The whole of India was at Gibreel's bedside. His condition was the lead item 
on every radio bulletin, it was the subject of hourly news-flashes on the 
national television network, and the crowd that gathered in Warden Road 
was so large that the police had to disperse it with lathi-charges and tear- 
gas, which they used even though every one of the half-million mourners 
was already tearful and wailing. The Prime Minister cancelled her 



appointments and flew to visit him. Her son the airline pilot sat in Farishta's 
bedroom, holding the actor's hand. A mood of apprehension settled over the 
nation, because if God had unleashed such an act of retribution against his 
most celebrated incarnation, what did he have in store for the rest of the 
country? If Gibreel died, could India be far behind? In the mosques and 
temples of the nation, packed congregations prayed, not only for the life of 
the dying actor, but for the future, for themselves. 

Who did not visit Gibreel in hospital? Who never wrote, made no telephone 
call, despatched no flowers, sent in no tiffins of delicious home cooking? 
While many lovers shamelessly sent him get-well cards and lamb pasandas, 
who, loving him most of all, kept herself to herself, unsuspected by her ball- 
-bearing of a husband? Rekha Merchant placed iron around her heart, and 
went through the motions of her daily life, playing with her children, chit- 
chatting with her husband, acting as his hostess when required, and never, 
not once, revealed the bleak devastation of her soul. 
He recovered. 

The recovery was as mysterious as the illness, and as rapid. It, too, was 
called (by hospital, journalists, friends) an act of the Supreme. A national 
holiday was declared; fireworks were set off up and down the land. But 
when Gibreel regained his strength, it became clear that he had changed, 
and to a startling degree, because he had lost his faith. 
On the day he was discharged from hospital he went under police escort 
through the immense crowd that had gathered to celebrate its own 
deliverance as well as his, climbed into his Mercedes and told the driver to 
give all the pursuing vehicles the slip, which took seven hours and fifty-one 
minutes, and by the end of the manoeuvre he had worked out what had to 
be done. He got out of the limousine at the Taj hotel and without looking left 
or right went directly into the great dining-room with its buffet table 
groaning under the weight of forbidden foods, and he loaded his plate with 
all of it, the pork sausages from Wiltshire and the cured York hams and the 
rashers of bacon from godknowswhere; with the gammon steaks of his 
unbelief and the pig's trotters of secularism; and then, standing there in the 
middle of the hall, while photographers popped up from nowhere, he began 
to eat as fast as possible, stuffing the dead pigs into his face so rapidly that 
bacon rashers hung out of the sides of his mouth. 

During his illness he had spent every minute of consciousness calling upon 
God, every second of every minute. Ya Allah whose servant lies bleeding do 
not abandon me now after watching oven me so long. Ya Allah show me 
some sign, some small mark of your favour, that I may find in myself the 
strength to cure my ills. O God most beneficent most merciful, be with me in 
this my time of need, my most grievous need. Then it occurred to him that 
he was being punished, and for a time that made it possible to suffer the 
pain, but after a time he got angry. Enough, God, his unspoken words 



demanded, why must I die when I have not killed, are you vengeance or are 
you love? The anger with God carried him through another day, but then it 
faded, and in its place there came a terrible emptiness, an isolation, as he 
realized he was talking to _thin air_, that there was nobody there at all, and 
then he felt more foolish than ever in his life, and he began to plead into the 
emptiness, ya Allah, just be there, damn it, just be. But he felt nothing, 
nothing nothing, and then one day he found that he no longer needed there 
to be anything to feel. On that day of metamorphosis the illness changed 
and his recovery began. And to prove to himself the non-existence of God, 
he now stood in the dining-hall of the city's most famous hotel, with pigs 
falling out of his face. 

He looked up from his plate to find a woman watching him. Her hair was so 
fair that it was almost white, and her skin possessed the colour and 
translucency of mountain ice. She laughed at him and turned away. 
"Don't you get it?" he shouted after her, spewing sausage fragments from 
the corners of his mouth. "No thunderbolt. That's the point." 
She came back to stand in front of him. "You're alive," she told him. "You 
got your life back. _That's_ the point." 

He told Rekha: the moment she turned around and started walking back I 
fell in love with her. Alleluia Cone, climber of mountains, vanquisher of 
Everest, blonde yahudan, ice queen. Her challenge, _change your life, or did 
you get it back for nothing_, I couldn't resist. 

"You and your reincarnation junk," Rekha cajoled him. "Such a nonsense 
head. You come out of hospital, back through death's door, and it goes to 
your head, crazy boy, at once you must have some escapade thing, and 
there she is, hey presto, the blonde mame. Don't think I don't know what 
you're like, Gibbo, so what now, you want me to forgive you or what?" 
No need, he said. He left Rekha's apartment (its mistress wept, face-down, 
on the floor); and never entered it again. 

Three days after he met her with his mouth full of unclean meat Allie got 
into an aeroplane and left. Three days out of time behind a do-not-disturb 
sign, but in the end they agreed that the world was real, what was possible 
was possible and what was impossible was im--, brief encounter, ships that 
pass, love in a transit lounge. After she left, Gibreel rested, tried to shut his 
ears to her challenge, resolved to get his life back to normal. Just because 
he'd lost his belief it didn't mean he couldn't do his job, and in spite of the 
scandal of the ham-eating photographs, the first scandal ever to attach itself 
to his name, he signed movie contracts and went back to work. 
And then, one morning, a wheelchair stood empty and he had gone. A 
bearded passenger, one Ismail Najmuddin, boarded Flight AI-420 to London. 
The 747 was named after one of the gardens of Paradise, not Gulistan but 
_Bostan_. "To be born again," Gibreel Farishta said to Saladin Chamcha 
much later, "first you have to die. Me, I only half-expired, but I did it on two 
occasions, hospital and plane, so it adds up, it counts. And now, Spoono my 



friend, here I stand before you in Proper London, Vilayet, regenerated, a 
new man with a new life. Spoono, is this not a bloody fine thing?" 
Why did he leave? 

Because of her, the challenge of her, the newness, the fierceness of the two 
of them together, the inexorability of an impossible thing that was insisting 
on its right to become. 

And, or, maybe: because after he ate the pigs the retribution began, a 

nocturnal retribution, a punishment of dreams. 

3 

Once the flight to London had taken off, thanks to his magic trick of crossing 
two pairs of fingers on each hand and rotating his thumbs, the narrow, 
fortyish fellow who sat in a non-smoking window seat watching the city of 
his birth fall away from him like old snakeskin allowed a relieved expression 
to pass briefly across his face. This face was handsome in a somewhat sour, 
patrician fashion, with long, thick, downturned lips like those of a disgusted 
turbot, and thin eyebrows arching sharply over eyes that watched the world 
with a kind of alert contempt. Mr. Saladin Chamcha had constructed this 
face with care -- it had taken him several years to get it just right — and for 
many more years now he had thought of it simply as _his own_ -- indeed, 
he had forgotten what he had looked like before it. Furthermore, he had 
shaped himself a voice to go with the face, a voice whose languid, almost 
lazy vowels contrasted disconcertingly with the sawn--off abruptness of the 
consonants. The combination of face and voice was a potent one; but, 
during his recent visit to his home town, his first such visit in fifteen years 
(the exact period, I should observe, of Gibreel Farishta's film stardom), 
there had been strange and worrying developments. It was unfortunately 
the case that his voice (the first to go) and, subsequently, his face itself, had 
begun to let him down. 

It started — Chamcha, allowing fingers and thumbs to relax and hoping, in 
some embarrassment, that his last remaining superstition had gone 
unobserved by his fellow-passengers, closed his eyes and remembered with 
a delicate shudder of horror — on his flight east some weeks ago. He had 
fallen into a torpid sleep, high above the desert sands of the Persian Gulf, 
and been visited in a dream by a bizarre stranger, a man with a glass skin, 
who rapped his knuckles mournfully against the thin, brittle membrane 
covering his entire body and begged Saladin to help him, to release him 
from the prison of his skin. Chamcha picked up a stone and began to batter 
at the glass. At once a latticework of blood oozed up through the cracked 
surface of the stranger's body, and when Chamcha tried to pick off the 
broken shards the other began to scream, because chunks of his flesh were 
coming away with the glass. At this point an air stewardess bent over the 
sleeping Chamcha and demanded, with the pitiless hospitality of her tribe: 
_Something to drink, sir? A drink?_, and Saladin, emerging from the dream, 
found his speech unaccountably metamorphosed into the Bombay lilt he had 



so diligently (and so long ago!) unmade. "Achha, means what?" he mumbled. 
"Alcoholic beverage or what?" And, when the stewardess reassured him, 
whatever you wish, sir, all beverages are gratis, he heard, once again, his 
traitor voice: "So, okay, bibi, give one whiskysoda only." 
What a nasty surprise! He had come awake with a jolt, and sat stiffly in his 
chair, ignoring alcohol and peanuts. How had the past bubbled up, in 
transmogrified vowels and vocab? What next? Would he take to putting 
coconut-oil in his hair? Would he take to squeezing his nostrils between 
thumb and forefinger, blowing noisily and drawing forth a glutinous silver arc 
of muck? Would he become a devotee of professional wrestling? What 
further, diabolic humiliations were in store? He should have known it was a 
mistake to _go home_, after so long, how could it be other than a regression; 
it was an unnatural journey; a denial of time; a revolt against history; the 
whole thing was bound to be a disaster. 

_I'm not myself_, he thought as a faint fluttering feeling began in the 
vicinity of his heart. But what does that mean, anyway, he added bitterly. 
After all, "les acteurs ne sont pas des gens", as the great ham Frederick had 
explained in _Les Enfants du Paradis_. Masks beneath masks until suddenly 
the bare bloodless skull. 

The seatbelt light came on, the captain's voice warned of air turbulence, 
they dropped in and out of air pockets. The desert lurched about beneath 
them and the migrant labourer who had boarded at Qatar clutched at his 
giant transistor radio and began to retch. Chamcha noticed that the man had 
not fastened his belt, and pulled himself together, bringing his voice back to 
its haughtiest English pitch. "Look here, why don't you. . ." he indicated, but 
the sick man, between bursts of heaving into the paper bag which Saladin 
had handed him just in time, shook his head, shrugged, replied: "Sahib, for 
what? If Allah wishes me to die, I shall die. If he does not, I shall not. Then 
of what use is the safety?" 

Damn you, India, Saladin Chamcha cursed silently, sinking back into his seat. 
To hell with you, I escaped your clutches long ago, you won't get your hooks 
into me again, you cannot drag me back. 

Once upon a time -- _it was and it was not so_, as the old stories used to 
say, _it happened and it never did_ -- maybe, then, or maybe not, a ten- 
year-old boy from Scandal Point in Bombay found a wallet lying in the Street 
outside his home. He was on the way home from school, having just 
descended from the school bus on which he had been obliged to sit 
squashed between the adhesive sweatiness of boys in shorts and be 
deafened by their noise, and because even in those days he was a person 
who recoiled from raucousness, jostling and the perspiration of strangers he 
was feeling faintly nauseated by the long, bumpy ride home. However, when 
he saw the black leather billfold lying at his feet, the nausea vanished, and 
he bent down excitedly and grabbed, -- opened, -- and found, to his delight, 
that it was full of cash, -- and not merely rupees, but real money, negotiable 



on black markets and international exchanges, -- pounds! Pounds sterling, 
from Proper London in the fabled country of Vilayet across the black water 
and far away. Dazzled by the thick wad of foreign currency, the boy raised 
his eyes to make sure he had not been observed, and for a moment it 
seemed to him that a rainbow had arched down to him from the heavens, a 
rainbow like an angel's breath, like an answered prayer, coming to an end in 
the very spot on which he stood. His fingers trembled as they reached into 
the wallet, towards the fabulous hoard. 

"Give it." It seemed to him in later life that his father had been spying on 
him throughout his childhood, and even though Changez Chamchawala was 
a big man, a giant even, to say nothing of his wealth and public standing, he 
still always had the lightness of foot and also the inclination to sneak up 
behind his son and spoil whatever he was doing, whipping the young 
Salahuddin's bedsheet off at night to reveal the shameful penis in the 
clutching, red hand. And he could smell money from a hundred and one 
miles away, even through the stink of chemicals and fertilizer that always 
hung around him owing to his being the country's largest manufacturer of 
agricultural sprays and fluids and artificial dung. Changez Chamchawala, 
philanthropist, philanderer, living legend, leading light of the nationalist 
movement, sprang from the gateway of his home to pluck a bulging wallet 
from his son's frustrated hand. "Tch tch," he admonished, pocketing the 
pounds sterling, "you should not pick things up from the street. The ground 
is dirty, and money is dirtier, anyway." 

On a shelf of Changez Chamchawala's teak-lined study, beside a ten-volume 
set of the Richard Burton translation of the Arabian Nights, which was being 
slowly devoured by mildew and bookworm owing to the deep-seated 
prejudice against books which led Changez to own thousands of the 
pernicious things in order to humiliate them by leaving them to rot unread, 
there stood a magic lamp, a brightly polished copper--and— brass avatar of 
Aladdin's very own genie-container: a lamp begging to be rubbed. But 
Changez neither rubbed it nor permitted it to be rubbed by, for example, his 
son. "One day," he assured the boy, "you'll have it for yourself. Then rub 
and rub as much as you like and see what doesn't come to you. Just now, 
but, it is mine." The promise of the magic lamp infected Master Salahuddin 
with the notion that one day his troubles would end and his innermost 
desires would be gratified, and all he had to do was wait it out; but then 
there was the incident of the wallet, when the magic of a rainbow had 
worked for him, not for his father but for him, and Changez Chamchawala 
had stolen the crock of gold. After that the son became convinced that his 
father would smother all his hopes unless he got away, and from that 
moment he became desperate to leave, to escape, to place oceans between 
the great man and himself. 

Salahuddin Chamchawala had understood by his thirteenth year that he was 
destined for that cool Vilayet full of the crisp promises of pounds sterling at 



which the magic billfold had hinted, and he grew increasingly impatient of 
that Bombay of dust, vulgarity, policemen in shorts, transvestites, movie 
fanzines, pavement sleepers and the rumoured singing whores of Grant 
Road who had begun as devotees of the Yellamma cult in Karnataka but 
ended up here as dancers in the more prosaic temples of the flesh. He was 
fed up of textile factories and local trains and all the confusion and 
superabundance of the place, and longed for that dream-Vilayet of poise and 
moderation that had come to obsess him by night and day. His favourite 
playground rhymes were those that yearned for foreign cities: kitchy--con 
kitchy-ki kitchy-con stanty-eye kitchy-ople kitchy-cople kitchyCon-stanti- 
nople. And his favourite game was the version ofgrandmother's footsteps in 
which, when he was it, he would turn his back on upcreeping playmates to 
gabble out, like a mantra, like a spell, the six letters of his dream--city, 
_ellowen deeowen_. In his secret heart, he crept silently up on London, 
letter by letter, just as his friends crept up to him. _Ellowen deeowen 
London_. 

The mutation of Salahuddin Chamchawala into Saladin Chamcha began, it 
will be seen, in old Bombay, long before he got close enough to hear the 
lions of Trafalgar roar. When the England cricket team played India at the 
Brabourne Stadium, he prayed for an England victory, for the game's 
creators to defeat the local upstarts, for the proper order of things to be 
maintained. (But the games were invariably drawn, owing to the featherbed 
somnolence of the Brabourne Stadium wicket; the great issue, creator 
versus imitator, colonizer against colonized, had perforce to remain 
unresolved.) 

In his thirteenth year he was old enough to play on the rocks at Scandal 
Point without having to be watched over by his ayah, Kasturba. And one day 
(it was so, it was not so), he strolled out of the house, that ample, crumbling, 
salt-caked building in the Parsi style, all columns and shutters and little 
balconies, and through the garden that was his father's pride and joy and 
which in a certain evening light could give the impression of being infinite 
(and which was also enigmatic, an unsolved riddle, because nobody, not his 
father, not the gardener, could tell him the names of most of the plants and 
trees), and out through the main gateway, a grandiose folly, a reproduction 
of the Roman triumphal arch of Septimius Severus, and across the wild 
insanity of the street, and over the sea wall, and so at last on to the broad 
expanse of shiny black rocks with their little shrimpy pools. Christian girls 
giggled in frocks, men with furled umbrellas stood silent and fixed upon the 
blue horizon. In a hollow of black stone Salahuddin saw a man in a dhoti 
bending over a pool. Their eyes met, and the man beckoned him with a 
single finger which he then laid across his lips. _Shh_, and the mystery of 
rock-pools drew the boy towards the stranger. He was a creature of bone. 
Spectacles framed in what might have been ivory. His finger curling, curling, 
like a baited hook, come. When Salahuddin came down the other grasped 



him, put a hand around his mouth and forced his young hand between old 
and fleshless legs, to feel the fleshbone there. The dhoti open to the winds. 
Salahuddin had never known how to fight; he did what he was forced to do, 
and then the other simply turned away from him and let him go. 
After that Salahuddin never went to the rocks at Scandal Point; nor did he 
tell anyone what had happened, knowing the neurasthenic crises it would 
unleash in his mother and suspecting that his father would say it was his 
own fault. It seemed to him that everything loathsome, everything he had 
come to revile about his home town, had come together in the stranger's 
bony embrace, and now that he had escaped that evil skeleton he must also 
escape Bombay, or die. He began to concentrate fiercely upon this idea, to 
fix his will upon it at all times, eating shitting sleeping, convincing himself 
that he could make the miracle happen even without his father's lamp to 
help him out. He dreamed of flying out of his bedroom window to discover 
that there, below him, was -- not Bombay -- but Proper London itself, 
Bigben Nelsonscolumn Lordstavern Bloodytower Queen. But as he floated 
out over the great metropolis he felt himself beginning to lose height, and no 
matter how hard he struggled kicked swam-in-air he continued to spiral 
slowly downwards to earth, then faster, then faster still, until he was 
screaming headfirst down towards the city, Saintpauls, Puddinglane, 
Threadneedlestreet, zeroing in on London like a bomb, 
ooo 

When the impossible happened, and his father, out of the blue, offered him 
an English education, _to get me out of the way_, he thought, _otherwise 
why, it's obvious, but don't look a gift horse andsoforth_, his mother 
Nasreen Chamchawala refused to cry, and volunteered, instead, the benefit 
of her advice. "Don't go dirty like those English," she warned him. "They 
wipe their bee tee ems with paper only. Also, they get into each other's dirty 
bathwater." These vile slanders proved to Salahuddin that his mother was 
doing her damnedest to prevent him from leaving, and in spite of their 
mutual love he replied, "It is inconceivable, Ammi, what you say. England is 
a great civilization, what are you talking, bunk." 

She smiled her little nervy smile and did not argue. And, later, stood dry- 
eyed beneath the triumphal arch of a gateway and would not go to 
Santacruz airport to see him off. Her only child. She heaped garlands around 
his neck until he grew dizzy with the cloying perfumes of mother-love. 
Nasreen Chamchawala was the slightest, most fragile of women, her bones 
like tinkas, like minute slivers of wood. To make up for her physical 
insignificance she took at an early age to dressing with a certain outrageous, 
excessive verve. Her sari-- patterns were dazzling, even garish: lemon silk 
adorned with huge brocade diamonds, dizzy black-and-white Op Art swirls, 
gigantic lipstick kisses on a bright white ground. People forgave her her lurid 
taste because she wore the blinding garments with such innocence; because 



the voice emanating from that textile cacophony was so tiny and hesitant 
and proper. And because of her soirees. 

Each Friday of her married life, Nasreen would fill the halls of the 
Chamchawala residence, those usually tenebrous chambers like great hollow 
burial vaults, with bright light and brittle friends. When Salahuddin was a 
little boy he had insisted on playing doorman, and would greet the jewelled 
and lacquered guests with great gravity, permitting them to pat him on the 
head and call him _cuteso_ and _chweetie-pie_. On Fridays the house was 
full of noise; there were musicians, singers, dancers, the latest Western hits 
as heard on Radio Ceylon, raucous puppet-shows in which painted clay 
rajahs rode puppet-stallions, decapitating enemy marionettes with 
imprecations and wooden swords. During the rest of the week, however, 
Nasreen would stalk the house warily, a pigeon of a woman walking on 
tiptoed feet through the gloom, as if she were afraid to disturb the shadowed 
silence; and her son, walking in her footsteps, also learned to lighten his 
footfall lest he rouse whatever goblin or afreet might be lying in wait. 
But: Nasreen Chamchawala's caution failed to save her life. The horror 
seized and murdered her when she believed herself most safe, clad in a sari 
covered in cheap newspaper photos and headlines, bathed in chandelier- 
light, surrounded by her friends, 
ooo 

By then five and a half years had passed since young Salahuddin, garlanded 
and warned, boarded a Douglas D C-8 and journeyed into the west. Ahead of 
him, England; beside him, his father, Changez Chamchawala; below him, 
home and beauty. Like Nasreen, the future Saladin had never found it easy 
to cry. 

On that first aeroplane he read science fiction tales of interplanetary 
migration: Asimov's _Foundation_, Ray Bradbury's _Martian Chronicles_. He 
imagined the DC--8 was the mother ship, bearing the Chosen, the Elect of 
God and man, across unthinkable distances, travelling for generations, 
breeding eugenically, that their seed might one day take root somewhere in 
a brave new world beneath a yellow sun. He corrected himself: not the 
mother but the father ship, because there he was, after all, the great man, 
Abbu, Dad. Thirteen-year-old Salahuddin, setting aside recent doubts and 
grievances, entered once again his childish adoration of his father, because 
he had, had, had worshipped him, he was a great father until you started 
growing a mind of your own, and then to argue with him was called a 
betrayal of his love, but never mind that now, _I accuse him of becoming my 
supreme being, so that what happened was like a loss of faith_ . . . yes, the 
father ship, an aircraft was not a flying womb but a metal phallus, and the 
passengers were spermatozoa waiting to be spilt. 

Five and a half hours of time zones; turn your watch upside down in Bombay 
and you see the time in London. _My father_, Chamcha would think, years 
later, in the midst of his bitterness. _I accuse him of inverting Time_. 



How far did they fly? Five and a half thousand as the crow. Or: from 
Indianness to Englishness, an immeasurable distance. Or, not very far at all, 
because they rose from one great city, fell to another. The distance between 
cities is always small; a villager, travelling a hundred miles to town, 
traverses emptier, darker, more terrifying space. 

What Changez Chamchawala did when the aeroplane took off: trying not to 
let his son see him doing it, he crossed two pairs of fingers on each hand, 
and rotated both his thumbs. 

And when they were installed in a hotel within a few feet of the ancient 
location of the Tyburn tree, Changez said to his son: "Take. This belongs to 
you." And held out, at arm's length, a black billfold about whose identity 
there could be no mistake. "You are a man now. Take." 
The return of the confiscated wallet, complete with all its currency, proved to 
be one of Changez Chamchawala's little traps. Salahuddin had been 
deceived by these all his life. Whenever his father wanted to punish him, he 
would offer him a present, a bar of imported chocolate or a tin of Kraft 
cheese, and would then grab him when he came to get it. "Donkey," 
Changez scorned his infant son. "Always, always, the carrot leads you to my 
stick." 

Salahuddin in London took the proffered wallet, accepting the gift of 
manhood; whereupon his father said: "Now that you are a man, it is for you 
to look after your old father while we are in London town. You pay all the 
bills." 

January, 1961. A year you could turn upside down and it would still, unlike 
your watch, tell the same time. It was winter; but when Salahuddin 
Chamchawala began to shiver in his hotel room, it was because he was 
scared halfway out of his wits; his crock of gold had turned, suddenly, into a 
sorcerer's curse. 

Those two weeks in London before he went to his boarding school turned 
into a nightmare of cash — tills and calculations, because Changez had meant 
exactly what he said and never put his hand into his own pocket once. 
Salahuddin had to buy his own clothes, such as a double-breasted blue 
serge mackintosh and seven blue-and-white striped Van Heusen shirts with 
detachable semi--stiff collars which Changez made him wear every day, to 
get used to the studs, and Salahuddin felt as if a blunt knife were being 
pushed in just beneath his newly broken Adam"s-apple; and he had to make 
sure there would be enough for the hotel room, and everything, so that he 
was too nervous to ask his father if they could go to a movie, not even one, 
not even _The Pure Hell of St Trinians_, or to eat out, not a single Chinese 
meal, and in later years he would remember nothing of his first fortnight in 
his beloved Ellowen Deeowen except pounds shillings pence, like the disciple 
of the philosopher—king Chanakya who asked the great man what he meant 
by saying one could live in the world and also not live in it, and who was told 
to carry a brim-full pitcher of water through a holiday crowd without spilling 



a drop, on pain of death, so that when he returned he was unable to 
describe the day's festivities, having been like a blind man, seeing only the 
jug on his head. 

Changez Chamchawala became very still in those days, seeming not to care 
if he ate or drank or did any damn thing, he was happy sitting in the hotel 
room watching television, especially when the Flintstones were on, because, 
he told his son, that Wilma bibi reminded him of Nasreen. Salahuddin tried 
to prove he was a man by fasting right along with his father, trying to 
outlast him, but he never managed it, and when the pangs got too strong he 
went out of the hotel to the cheap joint nearby where you could buy take- 
away roast chickens that hung greasily in the window, turning slowly on 
their spits. When he brought the chicken into the hotel lobby he became 
embarrassed, not wanting the staff to see, so he stuffed it inside 
doublebreasted serge and went up in the lift reeking of spit—roast, his 
mackintosh bulging, his face turning red. Chicken-breasted beneath the gaze 
of dowagers and liftwallahs he felt the birth of that implacable rage which 
would burn within him, undiminished, for over a quarter of a century; which 
would boil away his childhood father-worship and make him a secular man, 
who would do his best, thereafter, to live without a god of any type; which 
would fuel, perhaps, his determination to become the thing his father was- 
not-could-never-be, that is, a goodandproper Englishman. Yes, an English, 
even if his mother had been right all along, even if there was only paper in 
the toilets and tepid, used water full of mud and soap to step into after 
taking exercise, even if it meant a lifetime spent amongst winter—naked 
trees whose fingers clutched despairingly at the few, pale hours of watery, 
filtered light. On winter nights he, who had never slept beneath more than a 
sheet, lay beneath mountains of wool and felt like a figure in an ancient 
myth, condemned by the gods to have a boulder pressing down upon his 
chest; but never mind, he would be English, even if his classmates giggled 
at his voice and excluded him from their secrets, because these exclusions 
only increased his determination, and that was when he began to act, to find 
masks that these fellows would recognize, paleface masks, clown-masks, 
until he fooled them into thinking he was _okay_, he was _people-like-us_. 
He fooled them the way a sensitive human being can persuade gorillas to 
accept him into their family, to fondle and caress and stuff bananas in his 
mouth. 

(After he had settled up the last bill, and the wallet he had once found at a 
rainbow's end was empty, his father said to him: "See now. You pay your 
way. I've made a man of you." But what man? That's what fathers never 
know. Not in advance; not until it's too late.) 

One day soon after he started at the school he came down to breakfast to 
find a kipper on his plate. He sat there staring at it, not knowing where to 
begin. Then he cut into it, and got a mouthful of tiny bones. And after 
extracting them all, another mouthful, more bones. His fellow-pupils 



watched him suffer in silence; not one of them said, here, let me show you, 
you eat it in this way. It took him ninety minutes to eat the fish and he was 
not permitted to rise from the table until it was done. By that time he was 
shaking, and if he had been able to cry he would have done so. Then the 
thought occurred to him that he had been taught an important lesson. 
England was a peculiar-tasting smoked fish full of spikes and bones, and 
nobody would ever tell him how to eat it. He discovered that he was a 
bloody-minded person. "I'll show them all," he swore. "You see if I don't." 
The eaten kipper was his first victory, the first step in his conquest of 
England. 

William the Conqueror, it is said, began by eating a mouthful of English sand, 
ooo 

Five years later he was back home after leaving school, waiting until the 
English university term began, and his transmutation into a Vilayeti was well 
advanced. "See how well he complains," Nasreen teased him in front of his 
father. "About everything he has such big-big criticisms, the fans are fixed 
too. loosely to the roof and will fall to slice our heads off in our sleep, he 
says, and the food is too fattening, why we don't cook some things without 
frying, he wants to know, the top-floor balconies are unsafe and the paint is 
peeled, why can't we take pride in our surroundings, isn't it, and the garden 
is overgrown, we are just junglee people, he thinks so, and look how coarse 
our movies are, now he doesn't enjoy, and so much disease you can't even 
drink water from the tap, my god, he really got an education, husband, our 
little Sallu, England—returned, and talking so fine and all." 
They were walking on the lawn in the evening, watching the sun dive into 
the sea, wandering in the shade of those great spreading trees, some snaky 
some bearded, which Salahuddin (who now called himself Saladin after the 
fashion of the English school, but would remain Chamchawala for a while yet, 
until a theatrical agent shortened his name for commercial reasons) had 
begun to be able to name, jackfruit, banyan, jacaranda, flame of the forest, 
plane. Small chhooi-mooi touch-me-not plants grew at the foot of the tree of 
his own life, the walnut-tree that Changez had planted with his own hands 
on the day of the coming of the son. Father and son at the birth-tree were 
both awkward, unable to respond properly to Nasreen's gentle fun. Saladin 
had been seized by the melancholy notion that the garden had been a better 
place before he knew its names, that something had been lost which he 
would never be able to regain. And Changez Chamchawala found that he 
could no longer look his son in the eye, because the bitterness he saw came 
close to freezing his heart. When he spoke, turning roughly away from the 
eighteen-year-old walnut in which, at times during their long separations, he 
had imagined his only son's soul to reside, the words came out incorrectly 
and made him sound like the rigid, cold figure he had hoped he would never 
become, and feared he could not avoid. 



"Tell your son," Changez boomed at Nasreen, "that if he went abroad to 
learn contempt for his own kind, then his own kind can feel nothing but 
scorn for him. What is he? A fauntleroy, a grand panjandrum? Is this my 
fate: to lose a son and find a freak?" 

"Whatever I am, father dear," Saladin told the older man, "I owe it all to 
you." 

It was their last family chat. All that summer feelings continued to run high, 
for all Nasreen's attempts at mediation, _you must apologize to your father, 
darling, poor man is suffering like the devil but his pride won't let him hug 
you_. Even the ayah Kasturba and the old bearer Vallabh, her husband, 
attempted to mediate but neither father nor son would bend. "Same material 
is the problem," Kasturba told Nasreen. "Daddy and sonny, same material, 
same to same." 

When the war with Pakistan began that September Nasreen decided, with a 
kind of defiance, that she would not cancel her Friday parties, "to show that 
Hindus—Muslims can love as well as hate," she pointed out. Changez saw a 
look in her eyes and did not attempt to argue, but set the servants to 
putting blackout curtains over all the windows instead. That night, for the 
last time, Saladin Chamchawala played his old role of doorman, dressed up 
in an English dinner-jacket, and when the guests came -- the same old 
guests, dusted with the grey powders of age but otherwise the same — they 
bestowed upon him the same old pats and kisses, the nostalgic benedictions 
of his youth. "Look how grown," they were saying. "Just a darling, what to 
say." They were all trying to hide their fear of the war, _danger of air-raids_, 
the radio said, and when they ruffled Saladin's hair their hands were a little 
too shaky, or alternatively a little too rough. 

Late that evening the sirens sang and the guests ran for cover, hiding under 
beds, in cupboards, anywhere. Nasreen Chamchawala found herself alone by 
a food-laden table, and attempted to reassure the company by standing 
there in her newsprint sari, munching a piece of fish as if nothing were the 
matter. So it was that when she started choking on the fishbone of her 
death there was nobody to help her, they were all crouching in corners with 
their eyes shut; even Saladin, conqueror of kippers, Saladin of the England- 
returned upper lip, had lost his nerve. Nasreen Chamchawala fell, twitched, 
gasped, died, and when the all-clear sounded the guests emerged 
sheepishly to find their hostess extinct in the middle of the dining-room, 
stolen away by the exterminating angel, khali— pili khalaas, as Bombay— talk 
has it, finished off for no reason, gone for good. 

Less than a year after the death of Nasreen Chamchawala from her inability 
to triumph over fishbones in the manner of her foreign-educated son, 
Changez married again without a word of warning to anyone. Saladin in his 
English college received a letter from his father commanding him, in the 
irritatingly orotund and obsolescent phraseology that Changez always used 



in correspondence, to be happy. "Rejoice," the letter said, "for what is lost is 
reborn." The explanation for this somewhat cryptic sentence came lower 
down in the aerogramme, and when Saladin learned that his new 
stepmother was also called Nasreen, something went wrong in his head, and 
he wrote his father a letter full of cruelty and anger, whose violence was of 
the type that exists only between fathers and sons, and which differs from 
that between daughters and mothers in that there lurks behind it the 
possibility of actual, jaw— breaking fisticuffs. Changez wrote back by return 
of post; a brief letter, four lines of archaic abuse, cad rotter bounder 
scoundrel varlet whoreson rogue. "Kindly consider all family connections 
irreparably sundered," it concluded. "Consequences your responsibility." 
After a year of silence, Saladin received a further communication, a letter of 
forgiveness that was in all particulars harder to take than the earlier, 
excommunicatory thunderbolt. "When you become a father, O my son," 
Changez Chamchawala confided, "then shall you know those moments -- ah! 
Too sweet! -- when, for love, one dandies the bonny babe upon one's knee; 
whereupon, without warning or provocation, the blessed creature -- may I 
be frank? — it _wets_ one. Perhaps for a moment one feels the gorge rising, 
a tide of anger swells within the blood — but then it dies away, as quickly as 
it came. For do we not, as adults, understand that the little one is not to 
blame? He knows not what he does." 

Deeply offended at being compared to a urinating baby, Saladin maintained 
what he hoped was a dignified silence. By the time of his graduation he had 
acquired a British passport, because he had arrived in the country just 
before the laws tightened up, so he was able to inform Changez in a brief 
note that he intended to settle down in London and look for work as an actor. 
Changez Chamchawala's reply came by express mail. "Might as well be a 
confounded gigolo. It's my belief some devil has got into you and turned 
your wits. You who have been given so much: do you not feel you owe 
anything to anyone? To your country? To the memory of your dear mother? 
To your own mind? Will you spend your life jiggling and preening under 
bright lights, kissing blonde women under the gaze of strangers who have 
paid to watch your shame? You are no son of mine, but a _ghoul_, a 
_hoosh_, a demon up from hell. An actor! Answer me this: what am I to tell 
my friends?" 

And beneath a signature, the pathetic, petulant postscript. "Now that you 
have your own bad djinni, do not think you will inherit the magic lamp." 
ooo 

After that, Changez Chamchawala wrote to his son at irregular intervals, and 
in every letter he returned to the theme of demons and possession: "A man 
untrue to himself becomes a two-legged lie, and such beasts are Shaitan's 
best work," he wrote, and also, in more sentimental vein: "I have your soul 
kept safe, my son, here in this walnut-tree. The devil has only your body. 



When you are free of him, return and claim your immortal spirit. It flourishes 
in the garden." 

The handwriting in these letters altered over the years, changing from the 
florid confidence that had made it instantly identifiable and becoming 
narrower, undecorated, purified. Eventually the letters stopped, but Saladin 
heard from other sources that his father's preoccupation with the 
supernatural had continued to deepen, until finally he had become a recluse, 
perhaps in order to escape this world in which demons could steal his own 
son's body, a world unsafe for a man of true religious faith. 
His father's transformation disconcerted Saladin, even at such a great 
distance. His parents had been Muslims in the lackadaisical, light manner of 
Bombayites; Changez Chamchawala had seemed far more godlike to his 
infant son than any Allah. That this father, this profane deity (albeit now 
discredited), had dropped to his knees in his old age and started bowing 
towards Mecca was hard for his godless son to accept. 
"I blame that witch," he told himself, falling for rhetorical purposes into the 
same language of spells and goblins that his father had commenced to 
employ. "That Nasreen Two. Is it I who have been the subject of devilment, 
am I the one possessed? It's not my handwriting that changed." 
The letters didn't come any more. Years passed; and then Saladin Chamcha, 
actor, self-made man, returned to Bombay with the Prospero Players, to 
interpret the role of the Indian doctor in _The Millionairess_ by George 
Bernard Shaw. On stage, he tailored his voice to the requirements of the 
part, but those long-suppressed locutions, those discarded vowels and 
consonants, began to leak out of his mouth out of the theatre as well. His 
voice was betraying him; and he discovered his component parts to be 
capable of other treasons, too. 

ooo 

A man who sets out to make himself up is taking on the Creator's role, 
according to one way of seeing things; he's unnatural, a blasphemer, an 
abomination of abominations. From another angle, you could see pathos in 
him, heroism in his struggle, in his willingness to risk: not all mutants 
survive. Or, consider him sociopolitically: most migrants learn, and can 
become disguises. Our own false descriptions to counter the falsehoods 
invented about us, concealing for reasons of security our secret selves. 
A man who Invents himself needs someone to believe in him, to prove he's 
managed it. Playing God again, you could say. Or you could come down a 
few notches, and think of Tinkerbell; fairies don't exist if children don't clap 
their hands. Or you might simply say: it's just like being a man. 
Not only the need to be believed in, but to believe in another. You've got it: 
Love. 

Saladin Chamcha met Pamela Lovelace five and a half days before the end of 
the 1960s, when women still wore bandannas in their hair. She stood at the 
centre of a room full of Trotskyist actresses and fixed him with eyes so 



bright, so bright. He monopolized her all evening and she never stopped 
smiling and she left with another man. He went home to dream of her eyes 
and smile, the slenderness of her, her skin. He pursued her for two years. 
England yields her treasures with reluctance. He was astonished by his own 
perseverance, and understood that she had become the custodian of his 
destiny, that if she did not relent then his entire attempt at metamorphosis 
would fail. "Let me," he begged her, wrestling politely on her white rug that 
left him, at his midnight bus stops, covered in guilty fluff. "Believe me. I'm 
the one." 

One night, _out of the blue_, she let him, she said she believed. He married 
her before she could change her mind, but never learned to read her 
thoughts. When she was unhappy she would lock herself in the bedroom 
until she felt better. "It's none of your business," she told him. "I don't want 
anybody to see me when I'm like that." He used to call her a clam. "Open 
up," he hammered on all the locked doors of their lives together, basement 
first, then maisonette, then mansion. "I love you, let me in." He needed her 
so badly, to reassure himself of his own existence, that he never 
comprehended the desperation in her dazzling, permanent smile, the terror 
in the brightness with which she faced the world, or the reasons why she hid 
when she couldn't manage to beam. Only when it was too late did she tell 
him that her parents had committed suicide together when she had just 
begun to menstruate, over their heads in gambling debts, leaving her with 
the aristocratic bellow of a voice that marked her out as a golden girl, a 
woman to envy, whereas in fact she was abandoned, lost, her parents 
couldn't even be bothered to wait and watch her grow up, that's how much 
_she_ was loved, so of course she had no confidence at all, and every 
moment she spent in the world was full of panic, so she smiled and smiled 
and maybe once a week she locked the door and shook and felt like a husk, 
like an empty peanut-shell, a monkey without a nut. 
They never managed to have children; she blamed herself. After ten years 
Saladin discovered that there was something the matter with some of his 
own chromosomes, two sticks too long, or too short, he couldn't remember. 
His genetic inheritance; apparently he was lucky to exist, lucky not to be 
some sort of deformed freak. Was it his mother or his father from whom? 
The doctors couldn't say; he blamed, it's easy to guess which one, after all, 
it wouldn't do to think badly of the dead. 
They hadn't been getting along lately. 
He told himself that afterwards, but not during. 

Afterwards, he told himself, we were on the rocks, maybe it was the missing 
babies, maybe we just grew away from each other, maybe this, maybe that. 
During, he looked away from all the strain, all the scratchiness, all the fights 
that never got going, he closed his eyes and waited until her smile came 
back. He allowed himself to believe in that smile, that brilliant counterfeit of 
joy. 



He tried to invent a happy future for them, to make it come true by making 
it up and then believing in it. On his way to India he was thinking how lucky 
he was to have her, I'm lucky yes I am don't argue I'm the luckiest bastard 
in the world. And: how wonderful it was to have before him the stretching, 
shady avenue of years, the prospect of growing old in the presence of her 
gentleness. 

He had worked so hard and come so close to convincing himself of the truth 
of these paltry fictions that when he went to bed with Zeeny Vakil within 
forty-eight hours of arriving in Bombay, the first thing he did, even before 
they made love, was to faint, to pass out cold, because the messages 
reaching his brain were in such serious disagreement with one another, as if 
his right eye saw the world moving to the left while his left eye saw it sliding 
to the right. 

ooo 

Zeeny was the first Indian woman he had ever made love to. She barged 
into his dressing-room after the first night of _The Millionairess_, with her 
operatic arms and her gravel voice, as if it hadn't been years. _Years_. "Yaar, 
what a disappointment, I swear, I sat through the whole thing just to hear 
you singing "Goodness Gracious Me" like Peter Sellers or what, I thought, 
let's find out if the guy learned to hit a note, you remember when you did 
Elvis impersonations with your squash racket, darling, too hilarious, 
completely cracked. But what is this? Song is not in drama. The hell. Listen, 
can you escape from all these palefaces and come out with us wogs? Maybe 
you forgot what that is like." 

He remembered her as a stick-figure of a teenager in a lopsided Quant 
hairstyle and an equal-but-oppositely lopsided smile. A rash, bad girl. Once 
for the hell of it she walked into a notorious adda, a dive, on Falkland Road, 
and sat there smoking a cigarette and drinking Coke until the pimps who ran 
the joint threatened to cut her face, no freelances permitted. She stared 
them down, finished her cigarette, left. Fearless. Maybe crazy. Now in her 
middle thirties she was a qualified doctor with a consultancy at Breach 
Candy Hospital, who worked with the city's homeless, who had gone to 
Bhopal the moment the news broke of the invisible American cloud that ate 
people's eyes and lungs. She was an art critic whose book on the confining 
myth of authenticity, that folkloristic straitjacket which she sought to replace 
by an ethic of historically validated eclecticism, for was not the entire 
national culture based on the principle of borrowing whatever clothes 
seemed to fit, Aryan, Mughal, British, take--the-best-and--leave-the-rest? — 
had created a predictable stink, especially because of its title. She had called 
it _The Only Good Indian_. "Meaning, is a dead," she told Chamcha when 
she gave him a copy. "Why should there be a good, right way of being a wog? 
That's Hindu fundamentalism. Actually, we're all bad Indians. Some worse 
than others." 



She had come into the fullness of her beauty, long hair left loose, and she 
was no stick— figure these days. Five hours after she entered his dressing- 
room they were in bed, and he passed out. When he awoke she explained "I 
slipped you a mickey finn." He never worked out whether or not she had 
been telling the truth. 

Zeenat Vakil made Saladin her project. "The reclamation of," she explained. 
"Mister, we're going to get you back." At times he thought she intended to 
achieve this by eating him alive. She made love like a cannibal and he was 
her long pork. "Did you know," he asked her, "of the well-established 
connection between vegetarianism and the man-eating impulse?" Zeeny, 
lunching on his naked thigh, shook her head. "In certain extreme cases," he 
went on, "too much vegetable consumption can release into the system 
biochemicals that induce cannibal fantasies." She looked up and smiled her 
slanting smile. Zeeny, the beautiful vampire. "Come off it," she said. "We 
are a nation of vegetarians, and ours is a peaceful, mystical culture, 
everybody knows." 

He, for his part, was required to handle with care. The first time he touched 
her breasts she spouted hot astounding tears the colour and consistency of 
buffalo milk. She had watched her mother die like a bird being carved for 
dinner, first the left breast then the right, and still the cancer had spread. 
Her fear of repeating her mother's death placed her chest off limits. Fearless 
Zeeny's secret terror. She had never had a child but her eyes wept milk. 
After their first lovemaking she started right in on him, the tears forgotten 
now. "You know what you are, I'll tell you. A deserter is what, more English 
than, your Angrez accent wrapped around you like a flag, and don't think it's 
so perfect, it slips, baba, like a false moustache." 

"There's something strange going on," he wanted to say, "my voice," but he 
didn't know how to put it, and held his tongue. 

"People like you," she snorted, kissing his shoulder. "You come back after so 
long and think godknowswhat of yourselves. Well, baby, we got a lower 
opinion of you." Her smile was brighter than Pamela's. "I see," he said to her, 
"Zeeny, you didn't lose your Binaca smile." 

_Binaca_. Where had that come from, the long forgotten toothpaste 
advertisement? And the vowel sounds, distinctly unreliable. Watch out, 
Chamcha, look out for your shadow. That black fellow creeping up behind. 
On the second night she arrived at the theatre with two friends in tow, a 
young Marxist film-maker called George Miranda, a shambling whale of a 
man with rolled-up kurta sleeves, a flapping waistcoat bearing ancient stains, 
and a surprisingly military moustache with waxed points; and Bhupen 
Gandhi, poet and journalist, who had gone prematurely grey but whose face 
was baby-innocent until he unleashed his sly, giggling laugh. "Come on, 
Salad baba," Zeeny announced. "We're going to show you the town." She 
turned to her companions. "These _Asians_ from foreign got no shame," she 
declared. "Saladin, like a bloody lettuce, I ask you." 



"There was a TV reporter here some days back," George Miranda said. "Pink 
hair. She said her name was Kerleeda. I couldn't work it out." 
"Listen, George is too unworldly," Zeeny interrupted. "He doesn't know what 
freaks you guys turn into. That Miss Singh, outrageous. I told her, the 
name's Khalida, dearie, rhymes with Dalda, that's a cooking medium. But 
she couldn't say it. Her own name. Take me to your kerleader. You types got 
no culture. Just wogs now. Ain't it the truth?" she added, suddenly gay and 
round-eyed, afraid she'd gone too far. "Stop bullying him, Zeenat," Bhupen 
Gandhi said in his quiet voice. And George, awkwardly, mumbled: "No 
offence, man. Joke-shoke." 

Chamcha decided to grin and then fight back. "Zeeny," he said, "the earth is 
full of Indians, you know that, we get everywhere, we become tinkers in 
Australia and our heads end up in Idi Amin's fridge. Columbus was right, 
maybe; the world's made up of Indies, East, West, North. Damn it, you 
should be proud of us, our enterprise, the way we push against frontiers. 
Only thing is, we're not Indian like you. You better get used to us. What was 
the name of that book you wrote?" 

"Listen," Zeeny put her arm through his. "Listen to my Salad. Suddenly he 
wants to be Indian after spending his life trying to turn white. All is not lost, 
you see. Something in there still alive." And Chamcha felt himself flushing, 
felt the confusion mounting. India; it jumbled things up. 
"For Pete's sake," she added, knifing him with a kiss. "_Chamcha_. I mean, 
fuck it. You name yourself Mister Toady and you expect us not to laugh." 

ooo 

In Zeeny's beaten--up Hindustan, a car built for a servant culture, the back 
seat better upholstered than the front, he felt the night closing in on him like 
a crowd. India, measuring him against her forgotten immensity, her sheer 
presence, the old despised disorder. An Amazonic hijra got up like an Indian 
Wonder Woman, complete with silver trident, held up the traffic with one 
imperious arm, sauntered in front of them. Chamcha stared into herhis 
glaring eyes. Gibreel Farishta, the movie star who had unaccountably 
vanished from view, rotted on the hoardings. Rubble, litter, noise. Cigarette 
advertisements smoking past: SCISSORS -- FOR THE MAN OF ACTION, 
SATISFACTION. And, more improbably: PANAMA -- PART OF THE GREAT 
INDIAN SCENE. 

"Where are we going?" The night had acquired the quality of green neon 
strip— lighting. Zeeny parked the car. "You're lost," she accused him. "What 
do you know about Bombay? Your own city, only it never was. To you, it's a 
dream of childhood. Growing up on Scandal Point is like living on the moon. 
No bustees there, no sirree, only servants' quarters. Did Shiv Sena elements 
come there to make communal trouble? Were your neighbours starving in 
the textile strike? Did Datta Samant stage a rally in front of your bungalows? 
How old were you when you met a trade unionist? How old the first time you 



got on a local train instead of a car with driver? That wasn't Bombay, darling, 
excuse me. That was Wonderland, Peristan, NeverNever, Oz." 
"And you?" Saladin reminded her. "Where were you back then?" 
"Same place," she said fiercely. "With all the other bloody Munchkins." 
Back streets. A Jain temple was being re--painted and all the saints were in 
plastic bags to protect them from the drips. A pavement magazine vendor 
displayed newspapers full of horror: a railway disaster. Bhupcn Gandhi 
began to speak in his mild whisper. After the accident, he said, the surviving 
passengers swam to the shore (the train had plunged off a bridge) and were 
met by local villagers, who pushed them under the water until they drowned 
and then looted their bodies. 

"Shut your face," Zeeny shouted at him. "Why are you telling him such 
things? Already he thinks we're savages, a lower form." 
A shop was selling sandalwood to burn in a nearby Krishna temple and sets 
of enamelled pink-and-white Krishna--eyes that saw everything. "Too damn 
much to see," Bhupen said. "That is fact of matter." 

ooo 

In a crowded dhaba that George had started frequenting when he was 
making contact, for movie purposes, with the dadas or bosses who ran the 
city's flesh trade, dark rum was consumed at aluminium tables and George 
and Bhupen started, a little boozily, to quarrel. Zeeny drank Thums Up Cola 
and denounced her friends to Chamcha. "Drinking problems, both of them, 
broke as old pots, they both mistreat their wives, sit in dives, waste their 
stinking lives. No wonder I fell for you, sugar, when the local product is so 
low grade you get to like goods from foreign." 

George had gone with Zeeny to Bhopal and was becoming noisy on the 
subject of the catastrophe, interpreting it ideologically. "What is Amrika for 
us?" he demanded. "It's not a real place. Power in its purest form, 
disembodied, invisible. We can't see it but it screws us totally, no escape." 
He compared the Union Carbide company to the Trojan Horse. "We invited 
the bastards in." It was like the story of the forty thieves, he said. Hiding in 
their amphoras and waiting for the night. "We had no AN Baba, 
misfortunately," he cried. "Who did we have? Mr. Rajiv G." 
At this point Bhupen Gandhi stood up abruptly, unsteadily, and began, as 
though possessed, as though a spirit were upon him, to testify. "For me," he 
said, "the issue cannot be foreign intervention. We always forgive ourselves 
by blaming outsiders, America, Pakistan, any damn place. Excuse me, 
George, but for me it all goes back to Assam, we have to start with that." 
The massacre of the innocents. Photographs of children's corpses, arranged 
neatly in lines like soldiers on parade. They had been clubbed to death, 
pelted with stones, their necks cut in half by knives. Those neat ranks of 
death, Chamcha remembered. As if only horror could sting India into 
orderliness. 



Bhupen spoke for twenty-nine minutes without hesitations or pauses. "We 
are all guilty of Assam," he said. "Each person of us. Unless and until we 
face it, that the children's deaths were our fault, we cannot call ourselves a 
civilized people." He drank rum quickly as he spoke, and his voice got louder, 
and his body began to lean dangerously, but although the room fell silent 
nobody moved towards him, nobody tried to stop him talking, nobody called 
him a drunk. In the middle of a sentence, _everyday blindings, or shootings, 
or corruptions, who do we think we_, he sat down heavily and stared into his 
glass. 

Now a young man stood up in a far corner of the joint and argued back. 
Assam had to be understood politically, he cried, there were economic 
reasons, and yet another fellow came to his feet to reply, cash matters do 
not explain why a grown man clubs a little girl to death, and then another 
fellow said, if you think that, you have never been hungry, salah, how 
bloody romantic to suppose economics cannot make men into beasts. 
Chamcha clutched at his glass as the noise level rose, and the air seemed to 
thicken, gold teeth flashed in his face, shoulders rubbed against his, elbows 
nudged, the air was turning into soup, and in his chest the irregular 
palpitations had begun. George grabbed him by the wrist and dragged him 
out into the street. "You okay, man? You were turning green." Saladin 
nodded his thanks, gasped in lungfuls of the night, calmed down. "Rum and 
exhaustion," he said. "I have the peculiar habit of getting my nerves after 
the show. Quite often I get wobbly. Should have known." Zeeny was looking 
at him, and there was more in her eyes than sympathy. A glittering look, 
triumphant, hard. _Something got through to you_, her expression gloated. 
_About bloody time_. 

After you recover from typhoid, Chamcha reflected, you remain immune to 
the disease for ten years or so. But nothing is forever; eventually the 
antibodies vanish from your blood. He had to accept the fact that his blood 
no longer contained the immunizing agents that would have enabled him to 
suffer India's reality. Rum, heart palpitations, a sickness of the spirit. Time 
for bed. 

She wouldn't take him to her place. Always and only the hotel, with the 
gold-medallioned young Arabs strutting in the midnight corridors holding 
bottles of contraband whisky. He lay on the bed with his shoes on, his collar 
and tie loose, his right arm flung across his eyes; she, in the hotel's white 
bathrobe, bent over him and kissed his chin. "I'll tell you what happened to 
you tonight," she said. "You could say we cracked your shell." 
He sat up, angry. "Well, this is what's inside," he blazed at her. "An Indian 
translated into English-medium. When I attempt Hindustani these days, 
people look polite. This is me." Caught in the aspic of his adopted language, 
he had begun to hear, in India's Babel, an ominous warning: don't come 
back again. When you have stepped through the looking-glass you step back 
at your peril. The mirror may cut you to shreds. 



"I was so proud of Bhupen tonight," Zeeny said, getting into bed. "In how 
many countries could you go into some bar and start up a debate like that? 
The passion, the seriousness, the respect. You keep your civilization, Toadji; 
I like this one plenty fine." 

"Give up on me," he begged her. "I don't like people dropping in to see me 
without warning, I have forgotten the rules of seven—tiles and kabaddi, I 
can't recite my prayers, I don't know what should happen at a nikah 
ceremony, and in this city where I grew up I get lost if I'm on my own. This 
isn't home. It makes me giddy because it feels like home and is not. It 
makes my heart tremble and my head spin." 

"You're a stupid," she shouted at him. "A stupid. Change back! Damn fool! 
Of course you can." She was a vortex, a siren, tempting him back to his old 
self. But it was a dead self, a shadow, a ghost, and he would not become a 
phantom. There was a return ticket to London in his wallet, and he was 
going to use it. 

ooo 

"You never married," he said when they both lay sleepless in the small hours. 
Zeeny snorted. "You've really been gone too long. Can't you see me? I'm a 

blackie." Arching her back and throwing off the sheet to show off her 
lavishness. When the bandit queen Phoolan Devi came out of the ravines to 
surrender and be photographed, the newspapers at once uncreated their 

own myth of her Jegendary beauty_. She became _plain, a common 
creature, unappetizing_ where she had been _toothsome_. Dark skin in 
north India. "I don't buy it," Saladin said. "You don't expect me to believe 

that." 

She laughed. "Good, you're not a complete idiot yet. Who needs to marry? I 
had work to do." 

And after a pause, she threw his question back at him. _So, then. And you?_ 
Not only married, but rich. "So tell, na. How you live, you and the mame." In 
a five-storey mansion in Notting Hill. He had started feeling insecure there of 
late, because the most recent batch of burglars had taken not only the usual 
video and stereo but also the wolfhound guard dog. It was not possible, he 
had begun to feel, to live in a place where the criminal elements kidnapped 
the animals. Pamela told him it was an old local custom. In the Olden Days, 
she said (history, for Pamela, was divided into the Ancient Era, the Dark 
Ages, the Olden Days, the British Empire, the Modern Age and the Present), 
petnapping was good business. The poor would steal the canines of the rich, 
train them to forget their names, and sell them back to their grieving, 
helpless owners in shops on Portobello Road. Pamela's local history was 
always detailed and frequently unreliable. "But, my God," Zeeny Vakil said, 
"you must sell up pronto and move. I know those English, all the same, riff- 
raff and nawabs. You can't fight their bloody traditions." 



_My wife, Pamela Lovelace, frail as porcelain, graceful as gazelles_, he 
remembered. _I put down roots in the women I love_. The banalities of 
infidelity. He put them away and talked about his work. 
When Zeeny Vakil found out how Saladin Chamcha made his money, she let 
fly a series of shrieks that made one of the medallioned Arabs knock at the 
door to make sure everything was all right. He saw a beautiful woman sitting 
up in bed with what looked like buffalo milk running down her face and 
dripping off the point of her chin, and, apologizing to Chamcha for the 
intrusion, he withdrew hastily, _sorry, sport, hey, you're some lucky guy_. 
"You poor potato," Zeeny gasped between peals of laughter. "Those Angrez 
bastards. They really screwed you up." 

So now his work was funny. "I have a gift for accents," he said haughtily. 
"Why I shouldn't employ?" 

'"Why I should not employ ?_"' she mimicked him, kicking her legs in the air. 
"Mister actor, your moustache just slipped again." 
Oh my God. 

What's happening to me? 

What the devil? 

Help. 

Because he did have that gift, truly he did, he was the Man of a Thousand 
Voices and a Voice. If you wanted to know how your ketchup bottle should 
talk in its television commercial, if you were unsure as to the ideal voice for 
your packet of garlicflavoured crisps, he was your very man. He made 
carpets speak in warehouse advertisements, he did celebrity impersonations, 
baked beans, frozen peas. On the radio he could convince an audience that 
he was Russian, Chinese, Sicilian, the President of the United States. Once, 
in a radio play for thirty—seven voices, he interpreted every single part 
under a variety of pseudonyms and nobody ever worked it out. With his 
female equivalent, Mimi Mamoulian, he ruled the airwaves of Britain. They 
had such a large slice of the voiceover racket that, as Mimi said, "People 
better not mention the Monopolies Commission around us, not even in fun." 
Her range was astonishing; she could do any age, anywhere in the world, 
any point on the vocal register, angelic Juliet to fiendish Mae West. "We 
should get married sometime, when you're free," Mimi once suggested to 
him. "You and me, we could be the United Nations." 

"You're Jewish," he pointed out. "I was brought up to have views on Jews." 
"So I'm Jewish," she shrugged. "You're the one who's circumcised. Nobody's 
perfect." 

Mimi was tiny with tight dark curls and looked like a Michelin poster. In 
Bombay, Zeenat Vakil stretched and yawned and drove other women from 
his thoughts. "Too much," she laughed at him. "They pay you to imitate 
them, as long as they don't have to look at you. Your voice becomes famous 
but they hide your face. Got any ideas why? Warts on your nose, cross-- 



eyes, what? Anything come to mind, baby? You goddamn lettuce brain, I 
swear." 

It was true, he thought. Saladin and Mimi were legends of a sort, but 
crippled legends, dark stars. The gravitational field of their abilities drew 
work towards them, but they remained invisible, shedding bodies to put on 
voices. On the radio, Mimi could become the Botticelli Venus, she could be 
Olympia, Monroe, any damn woman she pleased. She didn't give a damn 
about the way she looked; she had become her voice, she was worth a mint, 
and three young women were hopelessly in love with her. Also, she bought 
property. "Neurotic behaviour," she would confess unashamedly. "Excessive 
need for rooting owing to upheavals of Armenian—Jewish history. Some 
desperation owing to advancing years and small polyps detected in the 
throat. Property is so soothing, I do recommend it." She owned a Norfolk 
vicarage, a farmhouse in Normandy, a Tuscan belltower, a sea--coast in 
Bohemia. "All haunted," she explained. "Clanks, howls, blood on the rugs, 
women in nighties, the works. Nobody gives up land without a fight." 
Nobody except me, Chamcha thought, a melancholy clutching at him as he 
lay beside Zeenat Vakil. Maybe I'm a ghost already. But at least a ghost with 
an airline ticket, success, money, wife. A shade, but living in the tangible, 
material world. With _assets_. Yes, sir. 

Zeeny stroked the hairs curling over his ears. "Sometimes, when you're 
quiet," she murmured, "when you aren't doing funny voices or acting grand, 
and when you forget people are watching, you look just like a blank. You 
know? An empty slate, nobody home. It makes me mad, sometimes, I want 
to slap you. To sting you back into life. But I also get sad about it. Such a 
fool, you, the big star whose face is the wrong colour for their colour T Vs, 
who has to travel to wogland with some two-bit company, playing the babu 
part on top of it, just to get into a play. They kick you around and still you 
stay, you love them, bloody slave mentality, I swear. Chamcha," she 
grabbed his shoulders and shook him, sitting astride him with her forbidden 
breasts a few inches from his face, "Salad baba, whatever you call yourself, 
for Pete's sake _come home_." 

His big break, the one that could soon make money lose its meaning, had 
started small: children's television, a thing called _The Aliens Show_, by 
_The Munsters_ out of _Star Wars_ by way of _Sesame Street_. It was a 
situation comedy about a group of extraterrestrials ranging from cute to 
psycho, from animal to vegetable, and also mineral, because it featured an 
artistic space-- rock that could quarry itself for its raw material, and then 
regenerate itself in time for the next week's episode; this rock was named 
Pygmalien, and owing to the stunted sense of humour of the show's 
producers there was also a coarse, belching creature like a puking cactus 
that came from a desert planet at the end of time: this was Matilda, the 
Australien, and there were the three grotesquely pneumatic, singing space 
sirens known as the Alien Korns, maybe because you could lie down among 



them, and there was a team of Venusian hip-hoppers and subway 
spraypainters and soul-brothers who called themselves the Alien Nation, and 
under a bed in the spaceship that was the programme's main location there 
lived Bugsy the giant dung-beetle from the Crab Nebula who had run away 
from his father, and in a fish-tank you could find Brains the super-intelligent 
giant abalone who liked eating Chinese, and then there was Ridley, the most 
terrifying of the regular cast, who looked like a Francis Bacon painting" of a 
mouthful of teeth waving at the end of a sightless pod, and who had an 
obsession with the actress Sigourney Weaver. The stars of the show, its 
Kermit and Miss Piggy, were the very fashionable, slinkily attired, stunningly 
hairstyled duo, Maxim and Mamma Alien, who yearned to be -- what else? -- 
television personalities. They were played by Saladin Chamcha and Mimi 
Mamoulian, and they changed their voices along with their clothes, to say 
nothing of their hair, which could go from purple to vermilion between shots, 
which could stand diagonally three feet up from their heads or vanish 
altogether; or their features and limbs, because they were capable of 
changing all of them, switching legs, arms, noses, ears, eyes, and every 
switch conjured up a different accent from their legendary, protean gullets. 
What made the show a hit was its use of the latest computer-generated 
imagery. The backgrounds were all simulated: spaceship, other—world 
landscapes, intergalactic game-show studios; and the actors, too, were 
processed through machines, obliged to spend four hours every day being 
buried under the latest in prosthetic make-up which -- once the 
videocomputers had gone to work -- made them look just like simulations, 
too. Maxim Alien, space playboy, and Mamma, undefeated galactic wrestling 
champion and universal all—corners pasta queen, were overnight sensations. 
Prime-time beckoned; America, Eurovision, the world. 
As _The Aliens Show_ got bigger it began to attract political criticism. 
Conservatives attacked it for being too frightening, too sexually explicit 
(Ridley could become positively erect when he thought too hard about Miss 
Weaver), too _weird_. Radical commentators began to attack its 
stereotyping, its reinforcement of the idea of aliens-as-freaks, its lack of 
positive images. Charncha came under pressure to quit the show; refused; 
became a target. "Trouble waiting when I go home," he told Zeeny. "The 
damn show isn't an allegory. It's an entertainment. It aims to please." 
"To please whom?" she wanted to know. "Besides, even now they only let 
you on the air after they cover your face with rubber and give you a red wig. 
Big deal deluxe, say I." 

"The point is," she said when they awoke the next morning, "Salad darling, 
you really are good looking, no quesch. Skin like milk, England returned. 
Now that Gibreel has done a bunk, you could be next in line. I'm serious, 
yaar. They need a new face. Come home and you could be the next, bigger 
than Bachchan was, bigger than Farishta. Your face isn't as funny as theirs." 



When he was young, he told her, each phase of his life, each self he tried on, 
had seemed reassuringly temporary. Its imperfections didn't matter, 
because he could easily replace one moment by the next, one Saladin by 
another. Now, however, change had begun to feel painful; the arteries of the 
possible had begun to harden. "It isn't easy to tell you this, but I'm married 
now, and not just to wife but life." _The accent slippage again_. "I really 
came to Bombay for one reason, and it wasn't the play. He's in his late 
seventies now, and I won't have many more chances. He hasn't been to the 
show; Muhammad must go to the mountain." 

My father, Changez Chamchawala, owner of a magic lamp_. "Changez 
Chamchawala, are you kidding, don't think you can leave me behind," she 
clapped her hands. "I want to check out the hair and toenails." His father, 
the famous recluse. Bombay was a culture of re--makes. Its architecture 
mimicked the skyscraper, its cinema endlessly re-invented _The Magnificent 
Seven_ and _Love Story_, obliging all its heroes to save at least one village 
from murderous dacoits and all its heroines to die of leukaemia at least once 
in their careers, preferably at the start. Its millionaires, too, had taken to 
importing their lives. Changez's invisibility was an Indian dream of the 
crorepati penthoused wretch of Las Vegas; but a dream was not a 
photograph, after all, and Zeeny wanted to see with her own eyes. "He 
makes faces at people if he's in a bad mood," Saladin warned her. "Nobody 
believes it till it happens, but it's true. Such faces! Gargoyles. Also, he's a 
prude and he'll call you a tart and anyway I'll probably have a fight with him, 
it's on the cards." 

What Saladin Chamcha had come to India for: forgiveness. That was his 
business in his old home town. But whether to give or to receive, he was not 
able to say. 
ooo 

Bizarre aspects of the present circumstances of Mr. Changez Chamchawala: 
with his new wife, Nasreen the Second, he lived for five days every week in 
a high-walled compound nicknamed the Red Fort in the Pali Hill district 
beloved of movie stars; but every weekend he returned without his wife to 
the old house at Scandal Point, to spend his days of rest in the lost world of 
the past, in the company of the first, and dead, Nasreen. Furthermore: it 
was said that his second wife refused to set foot in the old place. "Or isn't 
allowed to," Zeeny hypothesized in the back of the black-glass-windowed 
Mercedes limousine which Changez had sent to collect his son. As Saladin 
finished filling in the background, Zeenat Vakil whistled appreciatively. 
"Crazee." 

The Chamchawala fertilizer business, Changez's empire ofdung, was to be 
investigated for tax fraud and import duty evasion by a Government 
commission, but Zeeny wasn't interested in that. "Now," she said, "I'll get to 
find out what you're really like." 



Scandal Point unfurled before them. Saladin felt the past rush in like a tide, 
drowning him, filling his lungs with its revenant saltiness. J'rn not myself 
today_, he thought. The heart flutters. Life damages the living. None of us 
are ourselves. None of us are Jike this_. 

These days there were steel gates, operated by remote control from within, 
sealing the crumbling triumphal arch. They opened with a slow whirring 
sound to admit Saladin into that place of lost time. When he saw the walnut- 
tree in which his father had claimed that his soul was kept, his hands began 
to shake. He hid behind the neutrality of facts. "In Kashmir," he told Zeeny, 
"your birth-tree is a financial investment of a sort. When a child comes of 
age, the grown walnut is comparable to a matured insurance policy; it's a 
valuable tree, it can be sold, to pay for weddings, or a start in life. The adult 
chops down his childhood to help his grown-up self. The unsentimentality is 
appealing, don't you think?" 

The car had stopped under the entrance porch. Zeeny fell silent as the two 
of them climbed the six stairs to the front door, where they were greeted by 
a composed and ancient bearer in white, brass-buttoned livery, whose shock 
of white hair Chamcha suddenly recognized, by translating it back into black, 
as the mane of that same Vallabh who had presided over the house as its 
major-domo in the Olden Days. "My God, Vallabhbhai," he managed, and 
embraced the old man. The servant smiled a difficult smile. "I grow so old, 
baba, I was thinking you would not recognize." He led them down the 
crystal-heavy corridors of the mansion and Saladin realized that the lack of 
change was excessive, and plainly deliberate. It was true, Vallabh explained 
to him, that when the Begum died Changez Sahib had sworn that the house 
would be her memorial. As a result nothing had changed since the day she 
died, paintings, furniture, soap--dishes, the red-glass figures of fighting bulls 
and china ballerinas from Dresden, all left in their exact positions, the same 
magazines on the same tables, the same crumpled balls of paper in the 
wastebaskets, as though the house had died, too, and been embalmed. 
"Mummified," Zeeny said, voicing the unspeakable as usual. "God, but it's 
spooky, no?" It was at this point, while Vallabh the bearer was opening the 
double doors leading into the blue drawingroom, that Saladin Chamcha saw 
his mother's ghost. 

He let out a loud cry and Zeeny whirled on her heel. "There," he pointed 
towards the far, darkened end of the hallway, "no question, that blasted 
newsprint sari, the big headlines, the one she wore the day she, she," but 
now Vallabh had begun to flap his arms like a weak, flightless bird, you see, 
baba, it was only Kasturba, you have not forgotten, my wife, only my wife. 
_My ayah Kasturba with whom I played in rock-pools. Until I grew up and 
went without her and in a hollow a man with ivory glasses_. "Please, baba, 
nothing to be cross, only when the Begum died Changez Sahib donated to 
my wife some few garments, you do not object? Your mother was a so- 
generous woman, when alive she always gave with an open hand." Chamcha, 



recovering his equilibrium, was feeling foolish. "For God's sake, Vallabh," he 
muttered. "For God's sake. Obviously I don't object." An old stiffness re- 
entered Vallabh; the right to free speech of the old retainer permitted him to 
reprove, "Excuse, baba, but you should not blaspheme." 
"See how he's sweating," Zeeny stage-whispered. "He looks scared stiff." 
Kasturba entered the room, and although her reunion with Chamcha was 
warm enough there was still a wrongness in the air. Vallabh left to bring 
beer and Thums Up, and when Kasturba also excused herself, Zeeny at once 
said: "Something fishy. She walks like she owns the dump. The way she 
holds herself. And the old man was afraid. Those two are up to something, I 
bet." Chamcha tried to be reasonable. "They stay here alone most of the 
time, probably sleep in the master bedroom and eat off the good plates, it 
must get to feeling like their place." But he was thinking how strikingly, in 
that old sari, his ayah Kasturba had come to resemble his mother. 
"Stayed away so long," his father's voice spoke behind him, "that now you 
can't tell a living ayah from your departed ma." 

Saladin turned around to take in the melancholy sight of a father who had 
shrivelled like an old apple, but who insisted nevertheless on wearing the 
expensive Italian suits of his opulently fleshy years. Now that he had lost 
both Popeye-forearms and Bluto-belly, he seemed to be roaming about 
inside his clothes like a man in search of something he had not quite 
managed to identify. He stood in the doorway looking at his son, his nose 
and lips curled, by the withering sorcery of the years, into a feeble 
simulacrum of his former ogre--face. Chamcha had barely begun to 
understand that his father was no longer capable of frightening anybody, 
that his spell had been broken and he was just an old geezer heading for the 
grave; while Zeeny had noted with some disappointment that Changez 
Chamchawala's hair was conservatively short, and since he was wearing 
highly polished Oxford lace-ups it didn't seem likely that the eleveninch 
toenail story was true either; when the ayah Kasturba returned, smoking a 
cigarette, and strolled past the three of them, father son mistress, towards a 
blue velour-covered button-backed Chesterfield sofa, upon which she 
arranged her body as sensually as any movie starlet, even though she was a 
woman well advanced in years. 

No sooner had Kasturba completed her shocking entrance than Changez 
skipped past his son and planted himself beside the erstwhile ayah. Zeeny 
Vakil, her eyes sparkling with scandalpoints of light, hissed at Chamcha: 
"Close your mouth, dear. It looks bad." And in the doorway, the bearer 
Vallabh, pushing a drinks trolley, watched unemotionally while his employer 
of many long years placed an arm around his uncomplaining wife. 
When the progenitor, the creator is revealed as satanic, the child will 
frequently grow prim. Chamcha heard himself inquire: "And my stepmother, 
father dear? She is keeping well?" 



The old man addressed Zeeny. "He is not such a goody with you, I hope so. 
Or what a sad time you must have." Then to his son in harsher tones. "You 
have an interest in my wife these days? But she has none in you. She won't 
meet you now. Why should she forgive? You are no son to her. Or, maybe, 
by now, to me." 

_I did not come to fight him. Look, the old goat. I mustn't fight. But this, 
this is intolerable_. "In my mother's house," Chamcha cried 
melodramatically, losing his battle with himself. "The state thinks your 
business is corrupt, and here is the corruption of your soul. Look what 
you've done to them. Vallabh and Kasturba. With your money. How much 
did it take? To poison their lives. You're a sick man." He stood before his 
father, blazing with righteous rage. 

Vallabh the bearer, unexpectedly, intervened. "Baba, with respect, excuse 
me but what do you know? You have left and gone and now you come to 
judge us." Saladin felt the floor giving way beneath his feet; he was staring 
into the inferno. "It is true he pays us," Vallabh went on. "For our work, and 
also for what you see. For this." Changez Chamchawala tightened his grip on 
the ayah's unresisting shoulders. "How much?" Chamcha shouted. "Vallabh, 
how much did you two men decide upon? How much to prostitute your 
wife?" 

"What a fool," Kasturba said contemptuously. "Englandeducated and what-all, 
but still with a head full of hay. You come talking so big--big, _in your 
mother's house_ etcetera, but maybe you didn't love her so much. But we 
loved her, we all. We three. And in this manner we may keep her spirit 
alive." 

"It is pooja, you could say," came Vallabh's quiet voice. "An act of worship." 
"And you," Changez Chamchawala spoke as softly as his servant, "you come 
here to this temple. With your unbelief. Mister, you've got a nerve." 
And finally, the treason of Zeenat Vakil. "Come off it, Salad," she said, 
moving to sit on the arm of the Chesterfield next to the old man. "Why be 
such a sourpuss? You're no angel, baby, and these people seem to have 
worked things out okay." 

Saladin's mouth opened and shut. Changez patted Zeeny on the knee. "He 
came to accuse, dear. He came to avenge his youth, but we have turned the 
tables and he is confused. Now we must let him have his chance, and you 
must referee. I will not be sentenced by him, but I will accept the worst from 
you." 

_The bastard. Old bastard. He wanted me off-balance, and here I am, 
knocked sideways. I won't speak, why should I, not like this, the 
humiliation_. "There was," said Saladin Chamcha, "a wallet of pounds, and 
there was a roasted chicken." 
ooo 

Of what did the son accuse the father? Of everything: espionage on child- 
self, rainbow-pot-stealing, exile. Of turning him into what he might not have 



become. Of making-a-man of. Of whatwill-I-tell-my-friends. Of irreparable 
sunderings and offensive forgiveness. Of succumbing to Allah-worship with 
new wife and also to blasphemous worship of late spouse. Above all, of 
magic-lampism, of being an open-sesamist. Everything had come easily to 
him, charm, women, wealth, power, position. Rub, poof, genie, wish, at once 
master, hey presto. He was a father who had promised, and then withheld, a 
magic lamp, 
ooo 

Changez, Zeeny, Vallabh, Kasturba remained motionless and silent until 
Saladin Chamcha came to a flushed, embarrassed halt. "Such violence of the 
spirit after so long," Changez said after a silence. "So sad. A quarter of a 
century and still the son begrudges the peccadilloes of the past. O my son. 
You must stop carrying me around like a parrot on your shoulder. What am I? 
Finished. I'm not your Old Man of the Sea. Face it, mister: I don't explain 
you any more." 

Through a window Saladin Chamcha caught sight of a fortyyear-old walnut- 
tree. "Cut it down," he said to his father. "Cut it, sell it, send me the cash." 
Chamchawala rose to his feet, and extended his right hand. Zeeny, also 
rising, took it like a dancer accepting a bouquet; at once, Vallabh and 
Kasturba diminished into servants, as if a clock had silently chimed 
pumpkin-time. "Your book," he said to Zeeny. "I have something you'd like 
to see." 

The two of them left the room; impotent Saladin, after a moment's 
floundering, stamped petulantly in their wake. "Sourpuss," Zeeny called 
gaily over her shoulder. "Come on, snap out of it, grow up." 
The Chamchawala art collection, housed here at Scandal Point, included a 
large group of the legendary _Hamza-nama_ cloths, members of that 
sixteenth-century sequence depicting scenes from the life of a hero who may 
or may not have been the same Hamza as the famous one, Muhammad's 
uncle whose liver was eaten by the Meccan woman Hind as he lay dead on 
the battlefield of Uhud. "I like these pictures," Changez Chamchawala told 
Zeeny, "because the hero is permitted to fail. See how often he has to be 
rescued from his troubles." The pictures also provided eloquent proof of 
Zeeny Vakil's thesis about the eclectic, hybridized nature of the Indian 
artistic tradition. The Mughals had brought artists from every part of India to 
work on the paintings; individual identity was submerged to create a many- 
headed, many-brushed Overartist who, literally, _was_ Indian painting. One 
hand would draw the mosaic floors, a second the figures, a third would paint 
the Chinese-looking cloudy skies. On the backs of the cloths were the stories 
that accompanied the scenes. The pictures would be shown like a movie: 
held up while someone read out the hero's tale. In the _Hamza-nama_ you 
could see the Persian miniature fusing with Kannada and Keralan painting 
styles, you could see Hindu and Muslim philosophy forming their 
characteristically late--Mughal synthesis. 



A giant was trapped in a pit and his human tormentors were spearing him in 
the forehead. A man sliced vertically from the top of his head to his groin 
still held his sword as he fell. Everywhere, bubbling spillages of blood. 
Saladin Chamcha took a grip on himself. "The savagery," he said loudly in 
his English voice. "The sheer barbaric love of pain." 

Changez Chamchawala ignored his son, had eyes only for Zeeny; who gazed 
straight back into his own. "Ours is a government of philistines, young lady, 
don't you agree? I have offered this whole collection free gratis, did you 
know? Let them only house it properly, let them build a place. Condition of 
cloths is not A-l, you see . . . they won't do it. No interest. Meanwhile I get 
offers every month from Amrika. Offers of what-what size! You wouldn't 
believe. I don't sell. Our heritage, my dear, every day the U S A is taking it 
away. Ravi Varma paintings, Chandela bronzes, Jaisalmer lattices. We sell 
ourselves, isn't it? They drop their wallets on the ground and we kneel at 
their feet. Our Nandi bulls end up in some gazebo in Texas. But you know all 
this. You know India is a free country today." He stopped, but Zeeny waited; 
there was more to come. It came: "One day I will also take the dollars. Not 
for the money. For the pleasure of being a whore. Of becoming nothing. Less 
than nothing." And now, at last, the real storm, the words behind the words, 
Jess than nothing_. "When I die," Changez Chamchawala said to Zeeny, 
"what will I be? A pair of emptied shoes. That is my fate, that he has made 
for me. This actor. This pretender. He has made himself into an imitator of 
non-existing men. I have nobody to follow me, to give what I have made. 
This is his revenge: he steals from me my posterity." He smiled, patted her 
hand, released her into the care of his son. "I have told her," he said to 
Saladin. "You are still carrying your take-away chicken. I have told her my 
complaint. Now she must judge. That was the arrangement." 
Zeenat Vakil walked up to the old man in his outsize suit, put her hands on 
his cheeks, and kissed him on the lips. 

ooo 

After Zeenat betrayed him in the house of his father's perversions, Saladin 
Chamcha refused to see her or answer the messages she left at the hotel 
desk. _The Millionairess_ came to the end of its run; the tour was over. Time 
to go home. After the closing-night party Chamcha headed for bed. In the 
elevator a young and clearly honeymooning couple were listening to music 
on headphones. The young man murmured to his wife: "Listen, tell me. Do I 
still seem a stranger to you sometimes?" The girl, smiling fondly, shook her 
head, _can't hear_, removed the headphones. He repeated, gravely: "A 
stranger, to you, don't I still sometimes seem?" She, with unfaltering smile, 
laid her cheek for an instant on his high scrawny shoulder. "Yes, once or 
twice," she said, and put the headphones on again. He did the same, 
seeming fully satisfied by her answer. Their bodies took on, once again, the 
rhythms of the playback music. Chamcha got out of the lift. Zeeny was 
sitting on the floor with her back against his door. 



0 0 0 

Inside the room, she poured herself a large whisky and soda. "Behaving like 
a baby," she said. "You should be ashamed." 

That afternoon he had received a package from his father. Inside it was a 
small piece of wood and a large number of notes, not rupees but sterling 
pounds: the ashes, so to speak, of a walnut-tree. He was full of inchoate 
feeling and because Zeenat had turned up she became the target. "You think 
I love you?" he said, speaking with deliberate viciousness. "You think I'll stay 
with you? I'm a married man." 

"I didn't want you to stay for me," she said. "For some reason, I wanted it 
for you." 

A few days earlier, he had been to see an Indian dramatization of a story by 
Sartre on the subject of shame. In the original, a husband suspects his wife 
of infidelity and sets a trap to catch her out. He pretends to leave on a 
business trip, but returns a few hours later to spy on her. He is kneeling to 
look through the keyhole of their front door. Then he feels a presence behind 
him, turns without rising, and there she is, looking down at him with 
revulsion and disgust. This tableau, he kneeling, she looking down, is the 
Sartrean archetype. But in the Indian version the kneeling husband felt no 
presence behind him; was surprised by the wife; stood to face her on equal 
terms; blustered and shouted; until she wept, he embraced her, and they 
were reconciled. 

"You say I should be ashamed," Chamcha said bitterly to Zeenat. "You, who 
are without shame. As a matter of fact, this may be a national characteristic. 
I begin to suspect that Indians lack the necessary moral refinement for a 
true sense of tragedy, and therefore cannot really understand the idea of 
shame." 

Zeenat Vakil finished her whisky. "Okay, you don't have to say any more." 
She held up her hands. "I surrender. I'm going. Mr. Saladin Chamcha. I 
thought you were still alive, only just, but still breathing, but I was wrong. 
Turns out you were dead all the time." 

And one more thing before going milk-eyed through the door. "Don't let 
people get too close to you, Mr. Saladin. Let people through your defences 
and the bastards go and knife you in the heart." 

After that there had been nothing to stay for. The aeroplane lifted and 
banked over the city. Somewhere below him, his father was dressing up a 
servant as his dead wife. The new traffic scheme had jammed the city centre 
solid. Politicians were trying to build careers by going on padyatras, 
pilgrimages on foot across the country. There were graffiti that read: 
_Advice to politicos. Only step to take: padyatra to hell_. Or, sometimes: 
_to Assam_. 

Actors were getting mixed up in politics: MGR, N.T. Rama Rao, Bachchan. 
Durga Khote complained that an actors' association was a "red front". 
Saladin Chamcha, on Flight 420, closed his eyes; and felt, with deep relief, 



the tell--tale shiftings and settlings in his throat which indicated that his 
voice had begun of its own accord to revert to its reliable, English self. 
The first disturbing thing that happened to Mr. Chamcha on that flight was 
that he recognized, among his fellow-passengers, the woman of his dreams. 

4 

The dream-woman had been shorter and less graceful than the real one, but 
the instant Chamcha saw her walking calmly up and down the aisles of 
_Bostan_ he remembered the nightmare. After Zeenat Vakil's departure he 
had fallen into a troubled sleep, and the premonition had come to him: the 
vision of a woman bomber with an almost inaudibly soft, Canadian-accented 
voice whose depth and melody made it sound like an ocean heard from a 
long way away. The dream-woman had been so loaded down with explosives 
that she was not so much the bomber as the bomb; the woman walking the 
aisles held a baby that seemed to be sleeping noiselessly, a baby so skilfully 
swaddled and held so close to the breast that Chamcha could not see so 
much as a lock of new-born hair. Under the influence of the remembered 
dream he conceived the notion that the baby was in fact a bundle of 
dynamite sticks, or some sort of ticking device, and he was on the verge of 
crying out when he came to his senses and admonished himself severely. 
This was precisely the type of superstitious flummery he was leaving behind. 
He was a neat man in a buttoned suit heading for London and an ordered, 
contented life. He was a member of the real world. 
He travelled alone, shunning the company of the other members of the 
Prospero Players troupe, who had scattered around the economy class cabin 
wearing Fancy-a-Donald T-shirts and trying to wiggle their necks in the 
manner of natyam dancers and looking absurd in Benarsi saris and drinking 
too much cheap airline champagne and importuning the scorn—laden 
stewardesses who, being Indian, understood that actors were cheap-type 
persons; and behaving, in short, with normal thespian impropriety. The 
woman holding the baby had a way of looking through the paleface players, 
of turning them into wisps of smoke, heat-mirages, ghosts. For a man like 
Saladin Chamcha the debasing of Englishness by the English was a thing too 
painful to contemplate. He turned to his newspaper in which a Bombay "rail 
roko" demonstration was being broken up by police lathicharges. The 
newspaper's reporter suffered a broken arm; his camera, too, was smashed. 
The police had issued a "note". _Neither the reporter nor any other person 
was assaulted intentionally_. Chamcha drifted into airline sleep. The city of 
lost histories, felled trees and unintentional assaults faded from his thoughts. 
When he opened his eyes a little later he had his second, surprise of that 
macabre journey. A man was passing him on the way to the toilet. He was 
bearded and wore cheap tinted spectacles, but Chamcha recognized him 
anyway: here, travelling incognito in the economy class of Flight A 1--420, 
was the vanished superstar, the living legend, Gibreel Farishta himself. 



"Sleep okay?" He realized the question was addressed to him, and turned 
away from the apparition of the great movie actor to stare at the equally 
extraordinary sight sitting next to him, an improbable American in baseball 
cap, metal--rim spectacles and a neon--green bush--shirt across which there 
writhed the intertwined and luminous golden forms of a pair of Chinese 
dragons. Chamcha had edited this entity out of his field of vision in an 
attempt to wrap himself in a cocoon of privacy, but privacy was no longer 
possible. 

"Eugene Dumsday at your service," the dragon man stuck out a huge red 
hand. "At yours, and at that of the Christian guard." 
Sleep-fuddled Chamcha shook his head. "You are a military man?" 
"Ha! Ha! Yes, sir, you could say. A humble foot soldier, sir, in the army of 
Guard Almighty." Oh, _almighty_ guard, why didn't you say. "I am a man of 
science, sir, and it has been my mission, my mission and let me add my 
privilege, to visit your great nation to do battle with the most pernicious 
devilment ever got folks' brains by the balls." 
"I don't follow." 

Dumsday lowered his voice. "I'm talking monkey-crap here, sir. Darwinism. 
The evolutionary heresy of Mr. Charles Darwin." His tones made it plain that 
the name of anguished, God-ridden Darwin was as distasteful as that of any 
other forktail fiend, Beelzebub, Asmodeus or Lucifer himself. "I have been 
warning your fellow-men," Dumsday confided, "against Mr. Darwin and his 
works. With the assistance of my personal fifty-seven-slide presentation. I 
spoke most recently, sir, at the World Understanding Day banquet of the 
Rotary Club, Cochin, Kerala. I spoke of my own country, of its young people. 
I see them lost, sir. The young people of America: I see them in their 
despair, turning to narcotics, even, for I'm a plain—speaking man, to pre- 
marital sexual relations. And I said this then and I say it now to you. If I 
believed my great-granddaddy was a chimpanzee, why, I'd be pretty 
depressed myself." 

Gibreel Farishta was seated across the way, staring out of the window. The 
inflight movie was starting up, and the aircraft lights were being dimmed. 
The woman with the baby was still on her feet, walking up and down, 
perhaps to keep the baby quiet. "How did it go down?" Chamcha asked, 
sensing that some contribution from him was being required. 
A hesitancy came over his neighbour. "I believe there was a glitch in the 
sound system," he said finally. "That would be my best guess. I can't see 
how those good people would've set to talking amongst themselves if they 
hadn't've thought I was through." 

Chamcha felt a little abashed. He had been thinking that in a country of 
fervent believers the notion that science was the enemy of God would have 
an easy appeal; but the boredom of the Rotarians of Cochin had shown him 
up. In the flickering light of the inflight movie, Dumsday continued, in his 
voice of an innocent ox, to tell stories against himself without the faintest 



indication of knowing what he was doing. He had been accosted, at the end 
of a cruise around the magnificent natural harbour of Cochin, to which Vasco 
da Gama had come in search of spices and so set in motion the whole 
ambiguous history of east-and-west, by an urchin full of pssts and hey- 
mister— okays. "Hi there, yes! You want hashish, sahib? Hey, misteramerica. 
Yes, unclesam, you want opium, best quality, top price? Okay, you want 
_cocaine?_" 

Saladin began, helplessly, to giggle. The incident struck him as Darwin's 
revenge: if Dumsday held poor, Victorian, starchy Charles responsible for 
American drug culture, how delicious that he should himself be seen, across 
the globe, as representing the very ethic he battled so fervently against. 
Dumsday fixed him with a look of pained reproof. It was a hard fate to be an 
American abroad, and not to suspect why you were so disliked. 
After the involuntary giggle had escaped Saladin's lips, Dumsday sank into a 
sullen, injured drowse, leaving Chamcha to his own thoughts. Should the 
inflight movie be thought of as a particularly vile, random mutation of the 
form, one that would eventually be extinguished by natural selection, or 
were they the future of the cinema? A future of screwball caper movies 
eternally starring Shelley Long and Chevy Chase was too hideous to 
contemplate; it was a vision of Hell . . . Chamcha was drifting back into 
sleep when the cabin lights came on; the movie stopped; and the illusion of 
the cinema was replaced by one of watching the television news, as four 
armed, shouting figures came running down the aisles. 

ooo 

The passengers were held on the hijacked aircraft for one hundred and 
eleven days, marooned on a shimmering runway around which there 
crashed the great sand-waves of the desert, because once the four hijackers, 
three men one woman, had forced the pilot to land nobody could make up 
their minds what to do with them. They had come down not at an 
international airport but at the absurd folly of a jumbo-sized landing strip 
which had been built for the pleasure of the local sheikh at his favourite 
desert oasis, to which there now also led a six-lane highway very popular 
among single young men and women, who would cruise along its vast 
emptiness in slow cars ogling one another through the windows . . . once 
420 had landed here, however, the highway was full of armoured cars, troop 
transports, limousines waving flags. And while diplomats haggled over the 
airliner's fate, to storm or not to storm, while they tried to decide whether to 
concede or to stand firm at the expense of other people's lives, a great 
stillness settled around the airliner and it wasn't long before the mirages 
began. 

In the beginning there had been a constant flow of event, the hijacking 
quartet full of electricity, jumpy, trigger-happy. These are the worst 
moments, Chamcha thought while children screamed and fear spread like a 
stain, here's where we could all go west. Then they were in control, three 



men one woman, all tall, none of them masked, all handsome, they were 
actors, too, they were stars now, shootingstars or falling, and they had their 
own stage-names. Dara Singh Buta Singh Man Singh. The woman was 
Tavleen. The woman in the dream had been anonymous, as if Chamcha's 
sleeping fancy had no time for pseudonyms; but, like her, Tavleen spoke 
with a Canadian accent, smooth-edged, with those give-away rounded O's. 
After the plane landed at the oasis of Al-Zamzam it became plain to the 
passengers, who were observing their captors with the obsessive attention 
paid to a cobra by a transfixed mongoose, that there was something 
posturing in the beauty of the three men, some amateurish love of risk and 
death in them that made them appear frequently at the open doors of the 
airplane and flaunt their bodies at the professional snipers who must have 
been hiding amid the palm-trees of the oasis. The woman held herself aloof 
from such silliness and seemed to be restraining herself from scolding her 
three colleagues. She seemed insensible to her own beauty, which made her 
the most dangerous of the four. It struck Saladin Chamcha that the young 
men were too squeamish, too narcissistic, to want blood on their hands. 
They would find it difficult to kill; they were here to be on television. But 
Tavleen was here on business. He kept his eyes on her. The men do not 
know, he thought. They want to behave the way they have seen hijackers 
behaving in the movies and on TV; they arc reality aping a crude image of 
itself, they are worms swallowing their tails. But she, the woman, 
_knows_ . . . while Dara, Buta, Man Singh strutted and pranced, she became 
quiet, her eyes turned inwards, and she scared the passengers stiff. 
What did they want? Nothing new. An independent homeland, religious 
freedom, release of political detainees, justice, ransom money, a safe- 
conduct to a country of their choice. Many of the passengers came to 
sympathize with them, even though they were under constant threat of 
execution. If you live in the twentieth century you do not find it hard to see 
yourself in those, more desperate than yourself, who seek to shape it to 
their will. 

After they landed the hijackers released all but fifty of the passengers, 
having decided that fifty was the largest number they could comfortably 
supervise. Women, children, Sikhs were all released. It turned out that 
Saladin Chamcha was the only member of Prospero Players who was not 
given his freedom; he found himself succumbing to the perverse logic of the 
situation, and instead of feeling upset at having been retained he was glad 
to have seen the back of his badly behaved colleagues; good riddance to bad 
rubbish, he thought. 

The creationist scientist Eugene Dumsday was unable to bear the realization 
that the hijackers did not intend to release him. He rose to his feet, swaying 
at his great height like a skyscraper in a hurricane, and began shouting 
hysterical incoherences. A stream of dribble ran out of the corner of his 
mouth; he licked at it feverishly with his tongue. _Now just hold hard here, 



busters, now goddamn it enough is ENO UGH, whaddya wheredya get the 
idea you can_ and so forth, in the grip of his waking nightmare he drivelled 
on and on until one of the four, obviously it was the woman, came up, 
swung her rifle butt and broke his flapping jaw. And worse: because 
slobbering Dumsday had been licking his lips as his jaw slammed shut, the 
tip of his tongue sheared off and landed in Saladin Chamcha's lap; followed 
in quick time by its former owner. Eugene Dumsday fell tongueless and 
insensate into the actor's arms. 

Eugene Dumsday gained his freedom by losing his tongue; the persuader 
succeeded in persuading his captors by surrendering his instrument of 
persuasion. They didn't want to look after a wounded man, risk of gangrene 
and so on, and so he joined the exodus from the plane. In those first wild 
hours Saladin Chamcha's mind kept throwing up questions of detail, are 
those automatic rifles or sub-machine guns, how did they smuggle all that 
metal on board, in which parts of the body is it possible to be shot and still 
survive, how scared they must be, the four of them, how full of their own 
deaths. . . once Dumsday had gone, he had expected to sit alone, but a man 
came and sat in the creationist's old seat, saying you don't mind, yaar, in 
such circs a guy needs company. It was the movie star, Gibreel. 
ooo 

After the first nervous days on the ground, during which the three turbaned 
young hijackers went perilously close to the edges of insanity, screaming 
into the desert night _you bastards, come and get us_, or, alternatively, _o 
god o god they're going to send in the fucking commandos, the 
motherfucking Americans, yaar, the sisterfucking British_, -- moments 
during which the remaining hostages closed their eyes and prayed, because 
they were always most afraid when the hijackers showed signs of weakness, 
-- everything settled down into what began to feel like normality. Twice a 
day a solitary vehicle carried food and drink to _Bostan_ and left it on the 
tarmac. The hostages had to bring in the cartons while the hijackers 
watched them from the safety of the plane. Apart from this daily visit there 
was no contact with the outside world. The radio had gone dead. It was as if 
the incident had been forgotten, as if it were so embarrassing that it had 
simply been erased from the record. "The bastards are leaving us to rot," 
screamed Man Singh, and the hostages joined in with a will. "Hijras! 
Chootias! Shits!" 

They were wrapped in heat and silence and now the spectres began to 
shimmer out of the corners of their eyes. The most highly strung of the 
hostages, a young man with a goatee beard and close-cropped curly hair, 
awoke at dawn, shrieking with fear because he had seen a skeleton riding a 
camel across the dunes. Other hostages saw coloured globes hanging in the 
sky, or heard the beating of gigantic wings. The three male hijackers fell into 
a deep, fatalistic gloom. One day Tavleen summoned them to a conference 
at the far end of the plane; the hostages heard angry voices. "She's telling 



them they have to issue an ultimatum," Gibreel Farishta said to Chamcha. 
"One of us has to die, or such." But when the men returned Tavleen wasn't 
with them and the dejection in their eyes was tinged, now, with shame. 
"They lost their guts," Gibreel whispered. "No can do. Now what is left for 
our Tavleen bibi? Zero. Story funtoosh." 
What she did: 

In order to prove to her captives, and also to her fellow-captors, that the 
idea of failure, or surrender, would never weaken her resolve, she emerged 
from her momentary retreat in the first—class cocktail lounge to stand 
before them like a stewardess demonstrating safety procedures. But instead 
of putting on a lifejacket and holding up blow—tube whistle etcetera, she 
quickly lifted the loose black djellabah that was her only garment and stood 
before them stark naked, so that they could all see the arsenal of her body, 
the grenades like extra breasts nestling in her cleavage, the gelignite taped 
around her thighs, just the way it had been in Chamcha's dream. Then she 
slipped her robe back on and spoke in her faint oceanic voice. "When a great 
idea comes into the world, a great cause, certain crucial questions are asked 
of it," she murmured. "History asks us: what manner of cause are we? Are 
we uncompromising, absolute, strong, or will we show ourselves to be 
timeservers, who compromise, trim and yield?" Her body had provided her 
answer. 

The days continued to pass. The enclosed, boiling circumstances of his 
captivity, at once intimate and distant, made Saladin Chamcha want to 
argue with the woman, unbendingness can also be monomania, he wanted 
to say, it can be tyranny, and also it can be brittle, whereas what is flexible 
can also be humane, and strong enough to last. But he didn't say anything, 
of course, he fell into the torpor of the days. Gibreel Farishta discovered in 
the seat pocket in front of him a pamphlet written by the departed Dumsday. 
By this time Chamcha had noticed the determination with which the movie 
star resisted the onset of sleep, so it wasn't surprising to see him reciting 
and memorizing the lines of the creationist's leaflet, while his already heavy 
eyelids drooped lower and lower until he forced them to open wide again. 
The leaflet argued that even the scientists were busily re— inventing God, 
that once they had proved the existence of a single unified force of which 
electromagnetism, gravity and the strong and weak forces of the new 
physics were all merely aspects, avatars, one might say, or angels, then 
what would we have but the oldest thing of all, a supreme entity controlling 
all creation . . . "You see, what our friend says is, if you have to choose 
between some type of disembodied force-field and the actual living God, 
which one would you go for? Good point, na? You can't pray to an electric 
current. No point asking a wave-form for the key to Paradise." He closed his 
eyes, then snapped them open again. "All bloody bunk," he said fiercely. 
"Makes me sick." 



After the first days Chamcha no longer noticed Gibreel's bad breath, because 
nobody in that world of sweat and apprehension was smelling any better. 
But his face was impossible to ignore, as the great purple welts of his 
wakefulness spread outwards like oil--slicks from his eyes. Then at last his 
resistance ended and he collapsed on to Saladin's shoulder and slept for four 
days without waking once. 

When he returned to his senses he found that Chamcha, with the help of the 
mouse-like, goateed hostage, a certain Jalandri, had moved him to an empty 
row of seats in the centre block. He went to the toilet to urinate for eleven 
minutes and returned with a look of real terror in his eyes. He sat down by 
Chamcha again, but wouldn't say a word. Two nights later, Chamcha heard 
him fighting, once again, against the onset of sleep. Or, as it turned out: of 
dreams. 

"Tenth highest peak in the world," Chamcha heard him mutter, "is 
Xixabangma Feng, eight oh one three metres. Annapurna ninth, eighty 
seventy-eight." Or he would begin at the other end: "One, Chomolungma, 
eight eight four eight. Two, K2, eighty-six eleven. Kanchenjunga, eighty-five 
ninety-eight, Makalu, Dhaulagiri, Manaslu. Nanga Parbat, metres eight 
thousand one hundred and twenty-six." 

"You count eight thousand metre peaks to fall asleep?" Chamcha asked him. 
Bigger than sheep, but not so numerous. Gibreel Farishta glared at him; 
then bowed his head; came to a decision. "Not to sleep, my friend. To stay 
awake." 

That was when Saladin Chamcha found out why Gibreel Farishta had begun 
to fear sleep. Everybody needs somebody to talk to and Gibreel had spoken 
to nobody about what had happened after he ate the unclean pigs. The 
dreams had begun that very night. In these visions he was always present, 
not as himself but as his namesake, and I don't mean interpreting a role, 
Spoono, I am him, he is me, I am the bloody archangel, Gibreel himself, 
large as bloody life. 

_Spoono_. Like Zeenat Vakil, Gibreel had reacted with mirth to Saladin's 
abbreviated name. "Bhai, wow. I'm tickled, truly. Tickled pink. So if you are 
an English chamcha these days, let it be. Mr. Sally Spoon. It will be our little 
joke." Gibreel Farishta had a way of failing to notice when he made people 
angry. _Spoon, Spoono, my old Chumch_: Saladin hated them all. But could 
do nothing. Except hate. 

Maybe it was because of the nicknames, maybe not, but Saladin .found 
Gibreel's revelations pathetic, anticlimactic, what was so strange if his 
dreams characterized him as the angel, dreams do every damn thing, did it 
really display more than a banal kind of egomania? But Gibreel was sweating 
from fear: "Point is, Spoono," he pleaded, "every time I go to sleep the 
dream starts up from where it stopped. Same dream in the same place. As if 
somebody just paused the video while I went out of the room. Or, or. As if 
he's the guy who's awake and this is the bloody nightmare. His bloody 



dream: us. Here. All of it." Chamcha stared at him. "Crazy, right," he said. 
"Who knows if angels even sleep, never mind dream. I sound crazy. Am I 
right or what?" 
"Yes. You sound crazy." 

"Then what the hell," he wailed, "is going on in my head?" 
ooo 

The longer he spent without going to sleep the more talkative he became, he 
began to regale the hostages, the hijackers, as well as the dilapidated crew 
of Flight 420, those formerly scornful stewardesses and shining flight-deck 
personnel who were now looking mournfully moth-eaten in a corner of the 
plane and even losing their earlier enthusiasm for endless games of rummy, 
-- with his increasingly eccentric reincarnation theories, comparing their 
sojourn on that airstrip by the oasis of Al-Zamzam to a second period of 
gestation, telling everybody that they were all dead to the world and in the 
process of being regenerated, made anew. This idea seemed to cheer him up 
somewhat, even though it made many of the hostages want to string him up, 
and he leapt up on to a seat to explain that the day of their release would be 
the day of their rebirth, a piece of optimism that calmed his audience down. 
"Strange but true!" he cried. "That will be day zero, and because we will all 
share the birthday we will all be exactly the same age from that day on, for 
the rest of our lives. How do you call it when fifty kids come out of the same 
mother? God knows. Fiftuplets. Damn!" 

Reincarnation, for frenzied Gibreel, was a term beneath whose shield many 
notions gathered a-babeling: phoenix-from-ashes, the resurrection of Christ, 
the transmigration, at the instant of death, of the soul of the Dalai Lama into 
the body of a new-born child . . . such matters got mixed up with the 
avatars of Vishnu, the metamorphoses of Jupiter, who had imitated Vishnu 
by adopting the form of a bull; and so on, including of course the progress of 
human beings through successive cycles of life, now as cockroaches, now as 
kings, towards the bliss of no-morereturns. _To be born again, first you have 
to die_. Chamcha did not bother to protest that in most of the examples 
Gibreel provided in his soliloquies, metamorphosis had not required a death; 
the new flesh had been entered into through other gates. Gibreel in full flight, 
his arms waving like imperious wings, brooked no interruptions. "The old 
must die, you get my message, or the new cannot be whatnot." 
Sometimes these tirades would end in tears. Farishta in his exhaustion- 
beyond-exhaustion would lose control and place his sobbing head on 
Chamcha's shoulder, while Saladin -- prolonged captivity erodes certain 
reluctances among the captives -- would stroke his face and kiss the top of 
his head, _There, there, there_. On other occasions Chamcha's irritation 
would get the better of him. The seventh time that Farishta quoted the old 
Gramsci chestnut, Saladin shouted out in frustration, maybe that's what's 
happening to you, loudmouth, your old self is dying and that dream-angel of 
yours is trying to be born into your flesh. 



0 0 0 

"You want to hear something really crazy?" Gibreel after a hundred and one 
days offered Chamcha more confidences. "You want to know why I'm here?" 
And told him anyway: "For a woman. Yes, boss. For the bloody love of my 
bloody life. With whom I have spent a sum total of days three point five. 
Doesn't that prove I really am cracked? QED, Spoono, old Chumch." 
And: "How to explain it to you? Three and a half days of it, how long do you 
need to know that the best thing has happened, the deepest thing, the has- 
to--be-it? I swear: when I kissed her there were mother—fucking sparks, 
yaar, believe don't believe, she said it was static electricity in the carpet but 
I've kissed chicks in hotel rooms before and this was a definite first, a 
definite one-and-only. Bloody electric shocks, man, I had to jump back with 
pain." 

He had no words to express her, his woman of mountain ice, to express how 
it had been in that moment when his life had been in pieces at his feet and 
she had become its meaning. "You don't see," he gave up. "Maybe you never 
met a person for whom you'd cross the world, for whom you'd leave 
everything, walk out and take a plane. She climbed Everest, man. Twenty- 
nine thousand and two feet, or maybe twenty-nine one four one. Straight to 
the top. You think I can't get on a jumbo-jet for a woman like that?" 
The harder Gibreel Farishta tried to explain his obsession with the mountain- 
-climber Alleluia Cone, the more Saladin tried to conjure up the memory of 
Pamela, but she wouldn't come. At first it would be Zeeny who visited him, 
her shade, and then after a time there was nobody at all. Gibreel's passion 
began to drive Chamcha wild with anger and frustration, but Farishta didn't 
notice it, slapped him on the back, _cheer up, Spoono, won't be long now_. 

ooo 

On the hundred and tenth day Tavleen walked up to the little goateed 
hostage, Jalandri, and motioned with her finger. Our patience has been 
exhausted, she announced, we have sent repeated ultimatums with no 
response, it is time for the first sacrifice. She used that word: sacrifice. She 
looked straight into Jalandri's eyes and pronounced his death sentence. "You 
first. Apostate traitor bastard." She ordered the crew to prepare for take-off, 
she wasn't going to risk a storming of the plane after the execution, and 
with the point of her gun she pushed Jalandri towards the open door at the 
front, while he screamed and begged for mercy. "She's got sharp eyes," 
Gibreel said to Chamcha. "He's a cut-sird." Jalandri had become the first 
target because of his decision to give up the turban and cut his hair, which 
made him a traitor to his faith, a shorn Sirdarji. _Cut-Sird_. A seven—letter 
condemnation; no appeal. 

Jalandri had fallen to his knees, stains were spreading on the seat of his 
trousers, she was dragging him to the door by his hair. Nobody moved. Dara 
Buta Man Singh turned away from the tableau. He was kneeling with his 



back to the open door; she made him turn round, shot him in the back of 
the head, and he toppled out on to the tarmac. Tavleen shut the door. 
Man Singh, youngest and jumpiest of the quartet, screamed at her: "Now 
where do we go? In any damn place they'll send the commandos in for sure. 
We're gone geese now." 

"Martyrdom is a privilege," she said softly. "We shall be like stars; like the 
sun." 

ooo 

Sand gave way to snow. Europe in winter, beneath its white, transforming 
carpet, its ghost-white shining up through the night. The Alps, France, the 
coastline of England, white cliffs rising to whitened meadowlands. Mr. 
Saladin Chamcha jammed on an anticipatory bowler hat. The world had 
rediscovered Flight A 1-420, the Boeing 747 _Bostan_. Radar tracked it; 
radio messages crackled. _Do you want permission to land?_ But no 
permission was requested. _Bostan_ circled over England's shore like a 
gigantic sea-bird. Gull. Albatross. Fuel indicators dipped: towards zero. 
When the fight broke out, it took all the passengers by surprise, because this 
time the three male hijackers didn't argue with Tavleen, there were no fierce 
whispers about the _fuel_ about _what the fuck you're doing_ but just a 
mute stand-off, they wouldn't even talk to one another, as if they had given 
up hope, and then it was Man Singh who cracked and went for her. The 
hostages watched the fight to the death, unable to feel involved, because a 
curious detachment from reality had come over the aircraft, a kind of 
inconsequential casualness, a fatalism, one might say. They fell to the floor 
and her knife went up through his stomach. That was all, the brevity of it 
adding to its seeming unimportance. Then in the instant when she rose up it 
was as if everybody awoke, it became clear to them all that she really meant 
business, she was going through with it, all the way, she was holding in her 
hand the wire that connected all the pins of all the grenades beneath her 
gown, all those fatal breasts, and although at that moment Buta and Dara 
rushed at her she pulled the wire anyway, and the walls came tumbling 
down. 

No, not death: birth. 



II Mahound 



1 



Gibreel when he submits to the inevitable, when he slides heavy-lidded 
towards visions of his angeling, passes his loving mother who has a different 
name for him, Shaitan, she calls him, just like Shaitan, same to same, 
because he has been fooling around with the tiffins to be carried into the city 
for the office workers' lunch, mischeevious imp, she slices the air with her 
hand, rascal has been putting Muslim meat compartments into Hindu non- 
veg tiffin-carriers, customers are up in arms. Little devil, she scolds, but 
then folds him in her arms, my little farishta, boys will be boys, and he falls 
past her into sleep, growing bigger as he falls and the falling begins to feel 
like flight, his mother's voice wafts distantly up to him, baba, look how you 
grew, enor_mouse_, wah-wah, applause. He is gigantic, wingless, standing 
with his feet upon the horizon and his arms around the sun. In the early 
dreams he sees beginnings, Shaitan cast down from the sky, making a grab 
for a branch of the highest Thing, the lote-tree of the uttermost end that 
stands beneath the Throne, Shaitan missing, plummeting, splat. But he lived 
on, was not couldn't be dead, sang from heilbelow his soft seductive verses. 
O the sweet songs that he knew. With his daughters as his fiendish backing 
group, yes, the three of them, Lat Manat Uzza, motherless girls laughing 
with their Abba, giggling behind their hands at Gibreel, what a trick we got 
in store for you, they giggle, for you and for that businessman on the hill. 
But before the businessman there are other stories, here he is, Archangel 
Gibreel, revealing the spring of Zamzam to Hagar the Egyptian so that, 
abandoned by the prophet Ibrahim with their child in the desert, she might 
drink the cool spring waters and so live. And later, after the Jurhum filled up 
Zamzam with mud and golden gazelles, so that it was lost for a time, here 
he is again, pointing it out to that one, Muttalib of the scarlet tents, father of 
the child with the silver hair who fathered, in turn, the businessman. The 
businessman: here he comes. 

Sometimes when he sleeps Gibreel becomes aware, without the dream, of 
himself sleeping, of himself dreaming his own awareness of his dream, and 
then a panic begins, O God, he cries out, O allgood allahgod, I've had my 
bloody chips, me. Got bugs in the brain, full mad, a looney tune and a gone 
baboon. Just as he, the businessman, felt when he first saw the archangel: 
thought he was cracked, wanted to throw himself down from a rock, from a 
high rock, from a rock on which there grew a stunted lote-tree, a rock as 
high as the roof of the world. 



He's coming: making his way up Cone Mountain to the cave. Happy birthday: 

he's forty-four today. But though the city behind and below him throngs with 

festival, up he climbs, alone. No new birthday suit for him, neatly pressed 

and folded at the foot of his bed. A man of ascetic tastes. (What strange 

manner of businessman is this?) 

Question: What is the opposite of faith? 

Not disbelief. Too final, certain, closed. Itself a kind of belief. 

Doubt. 

The human condition, but what of the angelic? Halfway between Allahgod 
and homosap, did they ever doubt? They did: challenging God's will one day 
they hid muttering beneath the Throne, daring to ask forbidden things: 
antiquestions. Is it right that. Could it not be argued. Freedom, the old 
antiquest. He calmed them down, naturally, employing management skills a 
la god. Flattered them: you will be the instruments of my will on earth, of 
the salvationdamnation of man, all the usual etcetera. And hey presto, end 
of protest, on with the haloes, back to work. Angels are easily pacified; turn 
them into instruments and they'll play your harpy tune. Human beings are 
tougher nuts, can doubt anything, even the evidence of their own eyes. Of 
behind-their-own eyes. Of what, as they sink heavy-lidded, transpires 
behind closed peepers. . . angels, they don't have much in the way of a will. 
To will is to disagree; not to submit; to dissent. 
I know; devil talk. Shaitan interrupting Gibreel. 
Me? 

The businessman: looks as he should, high forehead, eaglenose, broad in 
the shoulders, narrow in the hip. Average height, brooding, dressed in two 
pieces of plain cloth, each four ells in length, one draped around his body, 
the other over his shoulder. Large eyes; long lashes like a girl's. His strides 
can seem too long for his legs, but he's a light-footed man. Orphans learn to 
be moving targets, develop a rapid walk, quick reactions, hold-yourtongue 
caution. Up through the thorn-bushes and opobalsam trees he comes, 
scrabbling on boulders, this is a fit man, no softbellied usurer he. And yes, to 
state it again: takes an odd sort of business wallah to cut off into the wilds, 
up Mount Cone, sometimes for a month at a stretch, just to be alone. 
His name: a dream-name, changed by the vision. Pronounced correctly, it 
means he-for-whom-thanks-should-be-given, but he won't answer to that 
here; nor, though he's well aware of what they call him, to his nickname in 
Jahilia down below -- _he-who-goes-up-and-down-old-Coney_. Here he is 
neither Mahomet nor MocHammered; has adopted, instead, the demon-tag 
the farangis hung around his neck. To turn insults into strengths, whigs, 
tories, Blacks all chose to wear with pride the names they were given in 
scorn; likewise, our mountain-climbing, prophetmotivated solitary is to be 
the medieval baby— frightener, the Devil's synonym: Mahound. 
That's him. Mahound the businessman, climbing his hot mountain in the 
Hijaz. The mirage of a city shines below him in the sun. 



0 0 0 

The city of Jahilia is built entirely of sand, its structures formed of the desert 
whence it rises. It is a sight to wonder at: walled, four-gated, the whole of it 
a miracle worked by its citizens, who have learned the trick of transforming 
the fine white dune-sand of those forsaken parts, — the very stuff of 
inconstancy, -- the quintessence of unsettlement, shifting, treachery, lack— 
of— form, -- and have turned it, by alchemy, into the fabric of their newly 
invented permanence. These people are a mere three or four generations 
removed from their nomadic past, when they were as rootless as the dunes, 
or rather rooted in the knowledge that the journeying itself was home. 
-- Whereas the migrant can do without the journey altogether; it's no more 
than a necessary evil; the point is to arrive. --. 
Quite recently, then, and like the shrewd businessmen they were, the 
Jahilians settled down at the intersection— point of the routes of the great 
caravans, and yoked the dunes to their will. Now the sand serves the mighty 
urban merchants. Beaten into cobbles, it paves Jahilia's tortuous streets; by 
night, golden flames blaze out from braziers of burnished sand. There is 
glass in the windows, in the long, slitlike windows set in the infinitely high 
sand-walls of the merchant palaces; in the alleys of Jahilia, donkey-carts roll 
forward on smooth silicon wheels. I, in my wickedness, sometimes imagine 
the coming of a great wave, a high wall of foaming water roaring across the 
desert, a liquid catastrophe full of snapping boats and drowning arms, a tidal 
wave that would reduce these vain sandcastles to the nothingness, to the 
grains from which they came. But there are no waves here. Water is the 
enemy in Jahilia. Carried in earthen pots, it must never be spilled (the penal 
code deals fiercely with offenders), for where it drops the city erodes 
alarmingly. Holes appear in roads, houses tilt and sway. The watercarriers of 
Jahilia are loathed necessities, pariahs who cannot be ignored and therefore 
can never be forgiven. It never rains in Jahilia; there are no fountains in the 
silicon gardens. A few palms stand in enclosed courtyards, their roots 
travelling far and wide below the earth in search of moisture. The city's 
water comes from underground streams and springs, one such being the 
fabled Zamzam, at the heart of the concentric sand— city, next to the House 
of the Black Stone. Here, at Zamzam, is a beheshti, a despised water- 
carrier, drawing up the vital, dangerous fluid. He has a name: Khalid. 
A city of businessmen, Jahilia. The name of the tribe is _Shark_. In this city, 
the businessman-turned-prophet, Mahound, is founding one of the world's 
great religions; and has arrived, on this day, his birthday, at the crisis of his 
life. There is a voice whispering in his ear: _What kind of idea are you? Man- 
or-mouse?_ 

We know that voice. We've heard it once before. 

ooo 

While Mahound climbs Coney, Jahilia celebrates a different anniversary. In 
ancient time the patriarch Ibrahim came into this valley with Hagar and 



Ismail, their son. Here, in this waterless wilderness, he abandoned her. She 
asked him, can this be God's will? He replied, it is. And left, the bastard. 
From the beginning men" used God to justify the unjustifiable. He moves in 
mysterious ways: men say. Small wonder, then, that women have turned to 
me. -- But I'll keep to the point; Hagar wasn't a witch. She was trusting: 
_then surely He will not let me perish_. After Ibrahim left her, she fed the 
baby at her breast until her milk ran out. Then she climbed two hills, first 
Safa then Marwah, running from one to the other in her desperation, trying 
to sight a tent, a camel, a human being. She saw nothing. That was when he 
came to her, Gibreel, and showed her the waters of Zamzam. So Hagar 
survived; but why now do the pilgrims congregate? To celebrate her survival? 
No, no. They are celebrating the honour done the valley by the visit of, 
you've guessed it, Ibrahim. In that loving consort's name, they gather, 
worship and, above all, spend. 

Jahilia today is all perfume. The scents of Araby, of _Arabia Odorifera_, hang 
in the air: balsam, cassia, cinnamon, frankincense, myrrh. The pilgrims drink 
the wine of the date-palm and wander in the great fair of the feast of 
Ibrahim. And, among them, one wanders whose furrowed brow sets him 
apart from the cheerful crowd: a tall man in loose white robes, he'd stand 
almost a full head higher than Mahound. His beard is shaped close to his 
slanting, high--boned face; his gait contains the lilt, the deadly elegance of 
power. What's he called? — The vision yields his name eventually; it, too, is 
changed by the dream. Here he is, Karim Abu Simbel, Grandee of Jahilia, 
husband to the ferocious, beautiful Hind. Head of the ruling council of the 
city, rich beyond numbering, owner of the lucrative temples at the city gates, 
wealthy in camels, comptroller of caravans, his wife the greatest beauty in 
the land: what could shake the certainties of such a man? And yet, for Abu 
Simbel, too, a crisis is approaching. A name gnaws at him, and you can 
guess what it is, Mahound Mahound Mahound. 

O the splendour of the fairgrounds of Jahilia! Here in vast scented tents are 
arrays of spices, of senna leaves, of fragrant woods; here the perfume 
vendors can be found, competing for the pilgrims' noses, and for their 
wallets, too. Abu Simbel pushes his way through the crowds. Merchants, 
Jewish, Monophysite, Nabataean, buy and sell pieces of silver and gold, 
weighing them, biting coins with knowing teeth. There is linen from Egypt 
and silk from China; from Basra, arms and grain. There is gambling, and 
drinking, and dance. There are slaves for sale, Nubian, Anatolian, Aethiop. 
The four factions of the tribe of Shark control separate zones of the fair, the 
scents and spices in the Scarlet Tents, while in the Black Tents the cloth and 
leather. The SilverHaired grouping is in charge of precious metals and 
swords. Entertainment -- dice, belly-dancers, palm-wine, the smoking of 
hashish and afeem -- is the prerogative of the fourth quarter of the tribe, 
the Owners of the Dappled Camels, who also run the slave trade. Abu 
Simbel looks into a dance tent. Pilgrims sit clutching money-bags in their left 



hands; every so often a coin is moved from bag to right-hand palm. The 
dancers shake and sweat, and their eyes never leave the pilgrims' fingertips; 
when the coin transfer ceases, the dance also ends. The great man makes a 
face and lets the tent-flap fall. 

Jahilia has been built in a series of rough circles, its houses spreading 
outwards from the House of the Black Stone, approximately in order of 
wealth and rank. Abu Simbel's palace is in the first circle, the innermost ring; 
he makes his way down one of the rambling, windy radial roads, past the 
city's many seers who, in return for pilgrim money, are chirping, cooing, 
hissing, possessed variously by djinnis of birds, beasts, snakes. A sorceress, 
failing for a moment to look up, squats in his path: "Want to capture a 
girlie's heart, my dear? Want an enemy under your thumb? Try me out; try 
my little knots!" And raises, dangles a knotty rope, ensnarer of human lives 
-- but, seeing now to whom she speaks, lets fall her disappointed arm and 
slinks away, mumbling, into sand. 

Everywhere, noise and elbows. Poets stand on boxes and declaim while 
pilgrims throw coins at their feet. Some bards speak rajaz verses, their four- 
-syllable metre suggested, according to legend, by the walking pace of the 
camel; others speak the qasidah, poems of wayward mistresses, desert 
adventure, the hunting of the onager. In a day or so it will be time for the 
annual poetry competition, after which the seven best verses will be nailed 
up on the walls of the House of the Black Stone. The poets are getting into 
shape for their big day; Abu Simbel laughs at minstrels singing vicious 
satires, vitriolic odes commissioned by one chief against another, by one 
tribe against its neighbour. And nods in recognition as one of the poets falls 
into step beside him, a sharp narrow youth with frenzied fingers. This young 
lampoonist already has the most feared tongue in all Jahilia, but to Abu 
Simbel he is almost deferential. "Why so preoccupied, Grandee? If you were 
not losing your hair I'd tell you to let it down." Abu Simbel grins his sloping 
grin. "Such a reputation," he muses. "Such fame, even before your milk- 
teeth have fallen out. Look out or we'll have to draw those teeth for you." He 
is teasing, speaking lightly, but even this lightness is laced with menace, 
because of the extent of his power. The boy is unabashed. Matching Abu 
Simbel stride for stride, he replies: "For every one you pull out, a stronger 
one will grow, biting deeper, drawing hotter spurts of blood." The Grandee, 
vaguely, nods. "You like the taste of blood," he says. The boy shrugs. "A 
poet's work," he answers. "To name the unnamable, to point at frauds, to 
take sides, start arguments, shape the world and stop it from going to 
sleep." And if rivers of blood flow from the cuts his verses inflict, then they 
will nourish him. He is the satirist, Baal. 

A curtained litter passes by; some fine lady of the city, out to see the fair, 
borne on the shoulders of eight Anatolian slaves. Abu Simbel takes the 
young Baal by the elbow, under the pretext of steering him out of the road; 
murmurs, "I hoped to find you; if you will, a word." Baa! marvels at the skill 



of the Grandee. Searching for a man, he can make his quarry think he has 
hunted the hunter. Abu Simbel's grip tightens; by the elbow, he steers his 
companion towards the holy of holies at the centre of the town. 
"I have a commission for you," the Grandee says. "A literary matter. I know 
my limitations; the skills of rhymed malice, the arts of metrical slander, are 
quite beyond my powers. You understand." 

But Baal, the proud, arrogant fellow, stiffens, stands on his dignity. "It isn't 
right for the artist to become the servant of the state." Simbel's voice falls 
lower, acquires silkier rhythms. "Ah, yes. Whereas to place yourself at the 
disposal of assassins is an entirely honourable thing." A cult of the dead has 
been raging in J ahilia. When a man dies, paid mourners beat themselves, 
scratch their breasts, tear hair. A hamstrung camel is left on the grave to die. 
And if the man has been murdered his closest relative takes ascetic vows 
and pursues the murderer until the blood has been avenged by blood; 
whereupon it is customary to compose a poem of celebration, but few 
revengers are gifted in rhyme. Many poets make a living by writing 
assassination songs, and there is general agreement that the finest of these 
blood—praising versifiers is the precocious polemicist, Baal. Whose 
professional pride prevents him from being bruised, now, by the Grandee's 
little taunt. "That is a cultural matter," he replies. Abu Simbel sinks deeper 
still into silkiness. "Maybe so," he whispers at the gates of the House of the 
Black Stone, "but, Baal, concede: don't I have some small claim upon you? 
We both serve, or so I thought, the same mistress." 
Now the blood leaves Baal's cheeks; his confidence cracks, falls from him 
like a shell. The Grandee, seemingly oblivious to the alteration, sweeps the 
satirist forward into the House. 

They say in Jahilia that this valley is the navel of the earth; that the planet, 
when it was being made, went spinning round this point. Adam came here 
and saw a miracle: four emerald pillars bearing aloft a giant glowing ruby, 
and beneath this canopy a huge white stone, also glowing with its own light, 
like a vision of his soul. He built strong walls around the vision to bind it 
forever to the earth. This was the first House. It was rebuilt many times -- 
once by Ibrahim, after Hagar's and Ismail's angel-- assisted survival -- and 
gradually the countless touchings of the white stone by the pilgrims of the 
centuries darkened its colour to black. Then the time of the idols began; by 
the time of Mahound, three hundred and sixty stone gods clustered around 
God's own stone. 

What would old Adam have thought? His own sons are here now: the 
colossus of Hubal, sent by the Amalekites from Hit, stands above the 
treasury well, Hubal the shepherd, the waxing crescent moon; also, 
glowering, dangerous Kain. He is the waning crescent, blacksmith and 
musician; he, too, has his devotees. 

Hubal and Kain look down on Grandee and poet as they stroll. And the 
Nabataean proto-Dionysus, He-Of-Shara; the morning star, Astarte, and 



saturnine Nakruh. Here is the sun god, Manaf! Look, there flaps the giant 
Nasr, the god in eagleform! See Quzah, who holds the rainbow ... is this not 
a glut of gods, a stone flood, to feed the glutton hunger of the pilgrims, to 
quench their unholy thirst. The deities, to entice the travellers, come -- like 
the pilgrims -- from far and wide. The idols, too, are delegates to a kind of 
international fair. 

There is a god here called Allah (means simply, the god). Ask the Jahilians 
and they'll acknowledge that this fellow has some sort of overall authority, 
but he isn't very popular: an all— rounder in an age of specialist statues. 
Abu Simbel and newly perspiring Baal have arrived at the shrines, placed 
side by side, of the three best-beloved goddesses in Jahilia. They bow before 
all three: Uzza of the radiant visage, goddess of beauty and love; dark, 
obscure Manat, her face averted, her purposes mysterious, sifting sand 
between her fingers -- she's in charge of destiny -- she's Fate; and lastly the 
highest of the three, the mother-goddess, whom the Greeks called Lato. Hat, 
they call her here, or, more frequently, Al--Lat. _The goddess_. Even her 
name makes her Allah's opposite and equal. Lat the omnipotent. His face 
showing sudden relief, Baal flings himself to the ground and prostrates 
himself before her. Abu Simbel stays on his feet. 

The family of the Grandee, Abu Simbel -- or, to be more precise, of his wife 
Hind -- controls the famous temple of Lat at the city's southern gate. (They 
also draw the revenues from the Manat temple at the east gate, and the 
temple of Uzza in the north.) These concessions are the foundations of the 
Grandee's wealth, so he is of course, Baal understands, the servant of Lat. 
And the satirist's devotion to this goddess is well known throughout Jahilia. 
So that was all he meant! Trembling with relief, Baal remains prostrate, 
giving thanks to his patron Lady. Who looks upon him benignly; but a 
goddess's expresson is not to be relied upon. Baal has made a serious 
mistake. 

Without warning, the Grandee kicks the poet in the kidney. Attacked just 
when he has decided he's safe, Baa! squeals, rolls over, and Abu Simbel 
follows him, continuing to kick. There is the sound of a cracking rib. "Runt," 
the Grandee remarks, his voice remaining low and good natured. "High- 
voiced pimp with small testicles. Did you think that the master of Lat's 
temple would claim comradeship with you just because of your adolescent 
passion for her?" And more kicks, regular, methodical. Baal weeps at Abu 
Simbel's feet. The House of the Black Stone is far from empty, but who 
would come between the Grandee and his wrath? Abruptly, Baal's tormentor 
squats down, grabs the poet by the hair, jerks his head up, whispers into his 
ear: "Baal, she wasn't the mistress I meant," and then Baal lets out a howl 
of hideous scif-pity, because he knows his life is about to end, to end when 
he has so much still to achieve, the poor guy. The Grandee's lips brush his 
ear. "Shit of a frightened camel," Abu Simbel breathes, "I know you fuck my 



wife." He observes, with interest, that Baal has acquired a prominent 
erection, an ironic monument to his fear. 

Abu Simbel, the cuckolded Grandee, stands up, commands, "On your feet", 
and Baal, bewildered, follows him outside. 

The graves of Ismail and his mother Hagar the Egyptian lie by the north- 
west face of the House of the Black Stone, in an enclosure surrounded by a 
low wall. Abu Simbel approaches this area, halts a little way off. In the 
enclosure is a small group of men. The water-carrier Khalid is there, and 
some sort of bum from Persia by the outlandish name of Salman, and to 
complete this trinity of scum there is the slave Bilal, the one Mahound freed, 
an enormous black monster, this one, with a voice to match his size. The 
three idlers sit on the enclosure wall. "That bunch of riff-raff," Abu Simbel 
says. "Those are your targets. Write about them; and their leader, too." 
Baa!, for all his terror, cannot conceal his disbelief. "Grandee, those _goons_ 
-- those fucking _clowns?_ You don't have to worry about them. What do 
you think? That Mahound's one God will bankrupt your temples? Three-sixty 
versus one, and the one wins? Can't happen." He giggles, close to hysteria. 
Abu Simbel remains calm: "Keep your insults for your verses." Giggling Baa! 
can't stop. "A revolution of water-carriers, immigrants and slaves . . . wow, 
Grandee. I'm really scared." Abu Simbel looks carefully at the tittering poet. 
"Yes," he answers, "that's right, you should be afraid. Get writing, please, 
and I expect these verses to be your masterpieces." Baa! crumples, whines. 
"But they are a waste of my, my small talent . . ." He sees that he has said 
too much. 

"Do as you're told," are Abu Simbel's last words to him. "You have no 
choice." 

ooo 

The Grandee lolls in his bedroom while concubines attend to his needs. 
Coconut— oil for his thinning hair, wine for his palate, tongues for his delight. 
_The boy was right. Why do I fear Mahound?_ He begins, idly, to count the 
concubines, gives up at fifteen with a flap of his hand. _The boy. Hind will go 
on seeing him, obviously; what chance does he have against her will ?_ It is 
a weakness in him, he knows, that he sees too much, tolerates too much. 
He has his appetites, why should she not have hers? As long as she is 
discreet; and as long as he knows. He must know; knowledge is his narcotic, 
his addiction. He cannot tolerate what he does not know and for that reason, 
if for no other, Mahound is his enemy, Mahound with his raggle-taggle gang, 
the boy was right to laugh. He, the Grandee, laughs less easily. Like his 
opponent he is a cautious man, he walks on the balls of his feet. He 
remembers the big one, the slave, Bilal: how his master asked him, outside 
the Lat temple, to enumerate the gods. "One," he answered in that huge 
musical voice. Blasphemy, punishable by death. They stretched him out in 
the fairground with a boulder on his chest. _How many did you say?_ One, 



he repeated, one. A second boulder was added to the first. _One one one_. 

Mahound paid his owner a large price and set him free. 
No, Abu Simbel reflects, the boy Baal was wrong, these men are worth our 
time. Why do I fear Mahound? For that: one one one, his terrifying 
singularity. Whereas I am always divided, always two or three or fifteen. I 
can even see his point of view; he is as wealthy and successful as any of us, 
as any of the councillors, but because he lacks the right sort of family 
connections, we haven't offered him a place amongst our group. Excluded by 
his orphaning from the mercantile elite, he feels he has been cheated, he 
has not had his due. He always was an ambitious fellow. Ambitious, but also 
solitary. You don't rise to the top by climbing up a hill all by yourself. Unless, 
maybe, you meet an angel there . . . yes, that's it. I see what he's up to. He 
wouldn't understand me, though. _What kind of idea am I?_ I bend. I sway. 
I calculate the odds, trim my sails, manipulate, survive. That is why I won't 
accuse Hind of adultery. We are a good pair, ice and fire. Her family shield, 
the fabled red lion, the many-toothed manticore. Let her play with her 
satirist; between us it was never sex. I'll finish him when she's finished with. 
Here's a great lie, thinks the Grandee of Jahilia drifting into sleep: the pen is 
mightier than the sword. 

ooo 

The fortunes of the city of Jahilia were built on the supremacy of sand over 
water. In the old days it had been thought safer to transport goods across 
the desert than over the seas, where monsoons could strike at any time. In 
those days before meteorology such matters were impossible to predict. For 
this reason the cara-- vanserais prospered. The produce of the world came 
up from Zafar to Sheba, and thence toJahilia and the oasis of Yathrib and on 
to Midian where Moses lived; thence to Aqabah and Egypt. From Jahilia 
other trails began: to the east and north-east, towards Mesopotamia and 
the great Persian empire. To Petra and to Palmyra, where once Solomon 
loved the Queen of Sheba. Those were fatted days. But now the fleets plying 
the waters around the peninsula have grown hardier, their crews more skilful, 

their navigational instruments more accurate. The camel trains are losing 
business to the boats. Desert-ship and sea-ship, the old rivalry, sees a tilt in 
the balance of power. Jahilia's rulers fret, but there is little they can do. 
Sometimes Abu Simbel suspects that only the pilgrimage stands between 
the city and its ruin. The council searches the world for statues of alien gods, 

to attract new pilgrims to the city of sand; but in this, too, they have 
competitors. Down in Sheba a great temple has been built, a shrine to rival 
the House of the Black Stone. Many pilgrims have been tempted south, and 

the numbers at the Jahilia fairgrounds are falling. 
At the recommendation of Abu Simbel, the rulers of Jahilia have added to 
their religious practices the tempting spices of profanity. The city has 
become famous for its licentiousness, as a gambling den, a whorehouse, a 
place of bawdy songs and wild, loud music. On one occasion some members 



of the tribe of Shark went too far in their greed for pilgrim money. The 
gatekeepers at the House began demanding bribes from weary voyagers; 
four of them, piqued at receiving no more than a pittance, pushed two 
travellers to their deaths down the great, steep flight of stairs. This practice 
backfired, discouraging return visits. . . Today, female pilgrims are often 
kidnapped for ransom, or sold into concubinage. Gangs of young Sharks 
patrol the city, keeping their own kind of law. It is said that Abu Simbel 
meets secretly with the gangleaders and organizes them all. This is the 
world into which Mahound has brought his message: one one one, Amid 
such multiplicity, it sounds like a dangerous word. 

The Grandee sits up and at once concubines approach to resume their oilings 
and smoothings. He waves them away, claps his hands. The eunuch enters. 
"Send a messenger to the house of the kahin Mahound," Abu Simbel 
commands. _We will set him a little test. A fair contest: three against one_. 

ooo 

Water-carrier immigrant slave: Mahound's three disciples are washing at the 
well of Zamzam. In the sand--city, their obsession with water makes them 
freakish. Ablutions, always ablutions, the legs up to the knees, the arms 
down to the elbows, the head down to the neck. Dry-torsoed, wet-limbed 
and damp-headed, what eccentrics they look! Splish, splosh, washing and 
praying. On their knees, pushing arms, legs, heads back into the ubiquitous 
sand, and then beginning again the cycle of water and prayer. These are 
easy targets for Baal's pen. Their water--loving is a treason of a sort; the 
people of Jahilia accept the omnipotence of sand. It lodges between their 
fingers and toes, cakes their lashes and hair, clogs their pores. They open 
themselves to the desert: come, sand, wash us in aridity. That is the Jahilian 
way from the highest citizen to the lowest of the low. They are people of 
silicon, and water-lovers have come among them. 

Baal circles them from a safe distance -- Bilal is not a man to trifle with — 
and yells gibes. "If Mahound's ideas were worth anything, do you think 
they'd only be popular with trash like you?" Salman restrains Bilal: "We 
should be honoured that the mighty Baal has chosen to attack us," he smiles, 
and Bilal relaxes, subsides. Khalid the water-carrier is jumpy, and when he 
sees the heavy figure of Mahound's uncle Hamza approaching he runs 
towards him anxiously. Hamza at sixty is still the city's most renowned 
fighter and lion-hunter. Though the truth is less glorious than the eulogies: 
Hamza has many times been defeated in combat, saved by friends or lucky 
chances, rescued from lions' jaws. He has the money to keep such items out 
of the news. And age, and survival, bestow a sort of validation upon a 
martial legend. Bilal and Salman, forgetting Baal, follow Khalid. All three are 
nervous, young. 

He's still not home, Hamza reports. And Khalid, worried: But it's been hours, 
what is that bastard doing to him, torture, thumbscrews, whips? Salman, 
once again, is the calmest: That isn't Simbel's style, he says, it's something 



sneaky, depend upon it. And Bilal bellows loyally: Sneaky or not, I have faith 
in him, in the Prophet. He won't break. Hamza offers only a gentle rebuke: 
Oh, Bilal, how many times must he tell you? Keep your faith for God. The 
Messenger is only a man. The tension bursts out of Khalid: he squares up to 
old Hamza, demands, Are you saying that the Messenger is weak? You may 
be his uncle . . . Hamza clouts the water-carrier on the side of the head. 
Don't let him see your fear, he says, not even when you're scared half to 
death. 

The four of them are washing once more when Mahound arrives; they 
cluster around him, whowhatwhy. Hamza stands back. "Nephew, this is no 
damn good," he snaps in his soldier's bark. "When you come down from 
Coney there's a brightness on you. Today it's something dark." 
Mahound sits on the edge of the well and grins. "I've been offered a deal." 
_By Abu Simbel?_ Khalid shouts. JJnthinkable. Refuse_. Faithful Bilal 
admonishes him: Do not lecture the Messenger. Of course, he has refused. 
Salman the Persian asks: What sort of deal. Mahound smiles again. "At least 
one of you wants to know." 

"It's a small matter," he begins again. "A grain of sand. Abu Simbel asks 
Allah to grant him one little favour." Hamza sees the exhaustion in him. As if 
he had been wrestling with a demon. The water—carrier is shouting: 
"Nothing! Not a jot!" Hamza shuts him up. 

"If our great God could find it in his heart to concede -- he used that word, 
_concede_ -- that three, only three of the three hundred and sixty idols in 
the house are worthy of worship . . ." 

"There is no god but God!" Bilal shouts. And his fellows join in: "Ya Allah!" 
Mahound looks angry. "Will the faithful hear the Messenger?" They fall silent, 
scuffing their feet in the dust. 

"He asks for Allah's approval of Lat, Uzza and Manat. In return, he gives his 
guarantee that we will be tolerated, even officially recognized; as a mark of 
which, I am to be elected to the council of Jahilia. That's the offer." 
Salman the Persian says: "It's a trap. If you go up Coney and come down 
with such a Message, he'll ask, how could you make Gibreel provide just the 
right revelation? He'll be able to call you a charlatan, a fake." Mahound 
shakes his head. "You know, Salman, that I have learned how to listen. This 
_listening_ is not of the ordinary kind; it's also a kind of asking. Often, when 
Gibreel comes, it's as if he knows what's in my heart. It feels to me, most 
times, as if he comes from within my heart: from within my deepest places, 
from my soul." 

"Or it's a different trap," Salman persists. "How long have we been reciting 
the creed you brought us? There is no god but God. What are we if we 
abandon it now? This weakens us, renders us absurd. We cease to be 
dangerous. Nobody will ever take us seriously again." 
Mahound laughs, genuinely amused. "Maybe you haven't been here long 
enough," he says kindly. "Haven't you noticed? The people do not take us 



seriously. Never more than fifty in the audience when I speak, and half of 

those are tourists. Don't you read the lampoons that Baal pins up all over 

town?" He recites: 

_Messenger, do please lend a_ 

_careful ear. Your monophilia_, 

_your one one one, ain't for Jahilia_. 

_Return to sender_. 

"They mock us everywhere, and you call us dangerous," he cried. 

Now Hamza looks worried. "You never worried about their opinions before. 

Why now? Why after speaking to Simbel?" 

Mahound shakes his head. "Sometimes I think I must make it easier for the 
people to believe." 

An uneasy silence covers the disciples; they exchange looks, shift their 
weight. Mahound cries out again. "You all know what has been happening. 
Our failure to win converts. The people will not give up their gods. They will 
not, not." He stands up, strides away from them, washes by himself on the 
far side of the Zamzam well, kneels to pray. 

"The people are sunk in darkness," says Bilal, unhappily. "But they will see. 
They will hear. God is one." Misery infects the four of them; even Hamza is 
brought low. Mahound has been shaken, and his followers quake. 
He stands, bows, sighs, comes round to rejoin them. "Listen to me, all of 
you," he says, putting one arm around Bilal's shoulders, the other around his 
uncle's. "Listen: it is an interesting offer." 

Unembraced Khalid interrupts bitterly: "It is a _tempting_ deal." The others 
look horrified. Hamza speaks very gently to the water—carrier. "Wasn't it 
you, Khalid, who wanted to fight me just now because you wrongly assumed 
that, when I called the Messenger a man, I was really calling him a weakling? 
Now what? Is it my turn to challenge you to a fight?" 
Mahound begs for peace. "If we quarrel, there's no hope." He tries to raise 
the discussion to the theological level. "It is not suggested that Allah accept 
the three as his equals. Not even Lat. Only that they be given some sort of 
intermediary, lesser status." 
"Like devils," Bilal bursts out. 

"No," Salman the Persian gets the point. "Like archangels. The Grandee's a 
clever man." 

"Angels and devils," Mahound says. "Shaitan and Gibreel. We all, already, 
accept their existence, halfway between God and man. Abu Simbel asks that 
we admit just three more to this great company. Just three, and, he 
indicates, all Jahilia's souls will be ours." 

"And the House will be cleansed of statues?" Salman asks. Mahound replies 
that this was not specified. Salman shakes his head. "This is being done to 
destroy you." And Bilal adds: "God cannot be four." And Khalid, close to 
tears: "Messenger, what are you saying? Lat, Manat, Uzza -- they're all 



_females!_ For pity's sake! Are we to have goddesses now? Those old cranes, 
herons, hags?" 

Misery strain fatigue, etched deeply into the Prophet's face. Which Hamza, 
like a soldier on a battlefield comforting a wounded friend, cups between his 
hands. "We can't sort this out for you, nephew," he says. "Climb the 
mountain. Go ask Gibreel." 

ooo 

Gibreel: the dreamer, whose point of view is sometimes that of the camera 
and at other moments, spectator. When he's a camera the pee oh vee is 
always on the move, he hates static shots, so he's floating up on a high 
crane looking down at the foreshortened figures of the actors, or he's 
swooping down to stand invisibly between them, turning slowly on his heel 
to achieve a threehundred-and-sixty-degree pan, or maybe he'll try a dolly 
shot, tracking along beside Baal and Abu Simbel as they walk, or hand—held 
with the help of a steadicam he'll probe the secrets of the Grandee's 
bedchamber. But mostly he sits up on Mount Cone like a paying customer in 
the dress circle, and Jahilia is his silver screen. He watches and weighs up 
the action like any movie fan, enjoys the fights infidelities moral crises, but 
there aren't enough girls for a real hit, man, and where are the goddamn 
songs? They should have built up that fairground scene, maybe a cameo role 
for Pimple Billimoria in a show-tent, wiggling her famous bazooms. 
And then, without warning, Hamza says to Mahound: "Go ask Gibreel," and 
he, the dreamer, feels his heart leaping in alarm, who, me? I'm supposed to 
know the answers here? I'm sitting here watching this picture and now this 
actor points his finger out at me, who ever heard the like, who asks the 
bloody audience of a "theological" to solve the bloody plot? -- But as the 
dream shifts, it's always changing form, he, Gibreel, is no longer a mere 
spectator but the central player, the star. With his old weakness for taking 
too many roles: yes, yes,, he's not just playing the archangel but also him, 
the businessman, the Messenger, Mahound, coming up the mountain when 
he comes. Nifty cutting is required to pull off this double role, the two of 
them can never be seen in the same shot, each must speak to empty air, to 
the imagined incarnation of the other, and trust to technology to create the 
missing vision, with scissors and Scotch tape or, more exotically, with the 
help of a travelling mat. Not to be confused ha ha with any magic carpet. 
He has understood: that he is afraid of the other, the business-man, isn't it 
crazy? The archangel quaking before the mortal man. It's true, but: the kind 
of fear you feel when you're on a film set for the very first time and there, 
about to make his entrance, is one of the living legends of the cinema; you 
think, I'll disgrace myself, I'll dry, I'll corpse, you want like mad to be 
_worthy_. You will be sucked along in the slipstream of his genius, he can 
make you look good, like a high flier, but you will know if you aren't pulling 
your weight and even worse so will he Gibreel's fear, the fear of the self his 



dream creates, makes him struggle against Mahound's arrival, to try and put 
it off, but he's coming now, no quesch, and the archangel holds his breath. 
Those dreams of being pushed out on stage when you've no business being 
there, you don't know the story haven't learned any lines, but there's a full 
house watching, watching: feels like that. Or the true story of the white 
actress playing a black woman in Shakespeare. She went on stage and then 
realized she still had her glasses on, eck, but she had forgotten to blacken 
her hands so she couldn't reach up to take the specs off, double eek: like 
that also. _Mahound comes to me for revelation, asking me to choose 
between monotheist and henotheist alternatives, and I'm just some idiot 
actor having a bhaenchud nightmare, what the fuck do I know, yaar, what to 
tell you, help. Help_. 
ooo 

To reach Mount Cone from Jahilia one must walk into dark ravines where the 
sand is not white, not the pure sand filtered long ago through the bodies of 
sea-cucumbers, but black and dour, sucking light from the sun. Coney 
crouches over you like an imaginary beast. You ascend along its spine. 
Leaving behind the last trees, white— flowered with thick, milky leaves, you 
climb among the boulders, which get larger as you get higher, until they 
resemble huge walls and start blotting out the sun. The lizards arc blue as 
shadows. Then you are on the peak, Jahilia behind you, the featureless 
desert ahead. You descend on the desert side, and about five hundred feet 
down you reach the cave, which is high enough to stand upright in, and 
whose floor is covered in miraculous albino sand. As you climb you hear the 
desert doves calling your name, and the rocks greet you, too, in your own 
language, crying Mahound, Mahound. When you reach the cave you are tired, 
you lie down, you fall asleep. 

ooo 

But when he has rested he enters a different sort of sleep, a sort of not— 
sleep, the condition that he calls his _listening_, and he feels a dragging 
pain in the gut, like something trying to be born, and now Gibreel, who has 
been hovering-above-looking-down, feels a confusion, _who am I_, in these 
moments it begins to seem that the archangel is actually _inside the 
Prophet_, I am the dragging in the gut, I am the angel being extruded from 
the sleeper's navel, I emerge, Gibreel Farishta, while my other self, 
Mahound, lies _listening_, entranced, I am bound to him, navel to navel, by 
a shining cord of light, not possible to say which of us is dreaming the other. 
We flow in both directions along the umbilical cord. 

Today, as well as the overwhelming intensity of Mahound, Gibreel feels his 
despair: his doubts. Also, that he is in great need, but Gibreel still doesn't 
know his lines ... he listens to the listening-which-is-also-an-asking. 
Mahound asks: They were shown miracles but they didn't believe. They saw 
you come to me, in full view of the city, and open my breast, they saw you 
wash my heart in the waters of Zamzam and replace it inside my body. 



Many of them saw this, but still they worship stones. And when you came at 
night and flew me to Jerusalem and I hovered above the holy city, didn't I 
return and describe it exactly as it is, accurate down to the last detail? So 
that there could be no doubting the miracle, and still they went to Lat. 
Haven't I already done my best to make things simple for them? When you 
carried me up to the Throne itself, and Allah laid upon the faithful the great 
burden of forty prayers a day. On the return journey I met Moses and he 
said, the burden is too heavy, go back and plead for less. Four times I went 
back, four times Moses said, still too many, go back again. But by the fourth 
time Allah had reduced the duty to five prayers and I refused to return. I felt 
ashamed to beg any more. In his bounty he asks for five instead of forty, 
and still they love Manat, they want Uzza. What can I do? What shall I recite? 
Gibreel remains silent, empty of answers, for Pete's sake, bhai, don't go 
asking me. Mahound's anguish is awful. He _asks_: is it possible that they 
_are_ angels? Lat, Manat, Uzza . . . can I call them angelic? Gibreel, have 
you got sisters? Are these the daughters of God? And he castigates himself, 
O my vanity, I am an arrogant man, is this weakness, is it just a dream of 
power? Must I betray myself for a seat on the council? Is this sensible and 
wise or is it hollow and self-loving? I don't even know if the Grandee is 
sincere. Does he know? Perhaps not even he. I am weak and he's strong, 
the offer gives him many ways of ruining me. But I, too, have much to gain. 
The souls of the city, of the world, surely they are worth three angels? Is 
Allah so unbending that he will not embrace three more to save the human 
race? -- I don't know anything. -- Should God be proud or humble, majestic 
or simple, yielding or un-? _What kind of idea is he? What kind am I?_ 
ooo 

Halfway into sleep, or halfway back to wakefulness, Gibreel Farishta is often 
filled with resentment by the non-appearance, in his persecuting visions, of 
the One who is supposed to have the answers, _He_ never turns up, the one 
who kept away when I was dying, when I needed needed him. The one it's 
all about, Allah Ishvar God. Absent as ever while we writhe and suffer in his 
name. 

The Supreme Being keeps away; what keeps returning is this scene, the 
entranced Prophet, the extrusion, the cord of light, and then Gibreel in his 
dual role is both above-looking-down and below-staring-up. And both of 
them scared out of their minds by the transcendence of it. Gibreel feels 
paralysed by the presence of the Prophet, by his greatness, thinks I can't 
make a sound I'd seem such a goddamn fool. Hamza's advice: never show 
your fear: archangels need such advice as well as water-carriers. An 
archangel must look composed, what would the Prophet think if God's 
Exalted began to gibber with stage fright? 

It happens: revelation. Like this: Mahound, still in his notsicep, becomes 
rigid, veins bulge in his neck, he clutches at his centre. No, no, nothing like 
an epileptic fit, it can't be explained away that easily; what epileptic fit ever 



caused day to turn to night, caused clouds to mass overhead, caused the air 
to thicken into soup while an angel hung, scared silly, in the sky above the 
sufferer, held up like a kite on a golden thread? The dragging again the 
dragging and now the miracle starts in his my our guts, he is straining with 
all his might at something, forcing something, and Gibreel begins to feel that 
strength that force, here it is _at my own jaw_ working it, opening shutting; 
and the power, starting within Mahound, reaching up to _my vocal cords_ 
and the voice comes. 

_Not my voice_ I'd never know such words I'm no classy speaker never was 
never will be but this isn't my voice it's a Voice. 

Mahound's eyes open wide, he's seeing some kind of vision, staring at it, oh, 
that's right, Gibreel remembers, me. He's seeing me. My lips moving, being 
moved by. What, whom? Don't know, can't say. Nevertheless, here they are, 
coming out of my mouth, up my throat, past my teeth: the Words. 
Being God's postman is no fun, yaar. 
Butbutbut: God isn't in this picture. 
God knows whose postman I've been, 
ooo 

In Jahilia they are waiting for Mahound by the well. Khalid the water-carrier, 
as ever the most impatient, runs off to the city gate to keep a look—out. 
Hamza, like all old soldiers accustomed to keeping his own company, squats 
down in the dust and plays a game with pebbles. There is no sense of 
urgency; sometimes he is away for days, even weeks. And today the city is 
all but deserted; everybody has gone to the great tents at the fairground to 
hear the poets compete. In the silence, there is only the noise of Hamza's 
pebbles, and the gurgles of a pair of rock-doves, visitors from Mount Cone. 
Then they hear the running feet. 

Khalid arrives, out of breath, looking unhappy. The Messenger has returned, 
but he isn't coming to Zamzam. Now they are all on their feet, perplexed by 
this departure from established practice. Those who have been waiting with 
palm-fronds and steles ask Hamza: Then there will be no Message? But 
Khalid, still catching his breath, shakes his head. "I think there will be. He 
looks the way he does when the Word has been given. But he didn't speak 
to me and walked towards the fairground instead." 
Hamza takes command, forestalling discussion, and leads the way. The 
disciples -- about twenty have gathered -- follow him to the fleshpots of the 
city, wearing expressions of pious disgust. Hamza alone seems to be looking 
forward to the fair. 

Outside the tents of the Owners of the Dappled Camels they find Mahound, 
standing with his eyes closed, steeling himself to the task. They ask anxious 
questions; he doesn't answer. After a few moments, he enters the poetry 
tent. 

ooo 



Inside the tent, the audience reacts to the arrival of the unpopular Prophet 
and his wretched followers with derision. But as Mahound walks forward, his 
eyes firmly closed, the boos and catcalls die away and a silence falls. 
Mahound does not open his eyes for an instant, but his steps are sure, and 
he reaches the stage without stumblings or collisions. He climbs the few 
steps up into the light; still his eyes stay shut. The assembled lyric poets, 
composers of assassination eulogies, narrative versifiers and satirists -- Baal 
is here, of course -- gaze with amusement, but also with a little unease, at 
the sleepwalking Mahound. In the crowd his disciples jostle for room. The 
scribes fight to be near him, to take down whatever he might say. 
The Grandee Abu Simbel rests against bolsters on a silken carpet positioned 
beside the stage. With him, resplendent in golden Egyptian neckwear, is his 
wife Hind, that famous Grecian profile with the black hair that is as long as 
her body. Abu Simbel rises and calls to Mahound, "Welcome." He is all 
urbanity. "Welcome, Mahound, the seer, the kahin." It's a public declaration 
of respect, and it impresses the assembled crowd. The Prophet's disciples 
are no longer shoved aside, but allowed to pass. Bewildered, half-pleased, 
they come to the front. Mahound speaks without opening his eyes. 
"This is a gathering of many poets," he says clearly, "and I cannot claim to 
be one of them. But I am the Messenger, and I bring verses from a greater 
One than any here assembled." 

The audience is losing patience. Religion is for the temple; J ahilians and 
pilgrims alike are here for entertainment. Silence the fellow! Throw him out! 
— But Abu Simbel speaks again. "If your God has really spoken to you," he 
says, "then all the world must hear it." And in an instant the silence in the 
great tent is complete. 

"_The Star_," Mahound cries out, and the scribes begin to write. 

"In the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful! 

"By the Pleiades when they set: Your companion is not in error; neither is he 

deviating. 

"Nor does he speak from his own desires. It is a revelation that has been 
revealed: one mighty in power has taught him. 

"He stood on the high horizon: the lord of strength. Then he came close, 
closer than the length of two bows, and revealed to his servant that which is 
revealed. 

"The servant's heart was true when seeing what he saw. Do you, then, dare 
to question what was seen? 

"I saw him also at the lote— tree of the uttermost end, near which lies the 
Garden of Repose. When that tree was covered by its covering, my eye was 
not averted, neither did my gaze wander; and I saw some of the greatest 
signs of the Lord." 

At this point, without any trace of hesitation or doubt, he recites two further 
verses. 



"Have you thought upon Lat and Uzza, and Manat, the third, the other?" — 
After the first verse, Hind gets to her feet; the Grandee of Jahilia is already 
standing very straight. And Mahound, with silenced eyes, recites: "They are 
the exalted birds, and their intercession is desired indeed." 
As the noise — shouts, cheers, scandal, cries of devotion to the goddess Al- 
Lat -- swells and bursts within the marquee, the already astonished 
congregation beholds the doubly sensational spectacle of the Grandee Abu 
Simbel placing his thumbs upon the lobes of his ears, fanning out the fingers 
of both hands and uttering in a loud voice the formula: "Allahu Akbar." After 
which he falls to his knees and presses a deliberate forehead to the ground. 
His wife, Hind, immediately follows his lead. 

The water-carrier Khalid has remained by the open tent-flap throughout 
these events. Now he stares in horror as everyone gathered there, both the 
crowd in the tent and the overflow of men and women outside it, begins to 
kneel, row by row, the movement rippling outwards from Hind and the 
Grandee as though they were pebbles thrown into a lake; until the entire 
gathering, outside the tent as well as in, kneels bottom— in — air before the 
shuteye Prophet who has recognized the patron deities of the town. The 
Messenger himself remains standing, as if loth to join the assembly in its 
devotions. Bursting into tears, the water-carrier flees into the empty heart 
of the city of the sands. His teardrops, as he runs, burn holes in the earth, 
as if they contain some harsh corrosive acid. 

Mahound remains motionless. No trace of moisture can be detected on the 

lashes of his unopened eyes. 

ooo 

On that night of the desolating triumph of the businessman in the tent of the 
unbelievers, there take place certain murders for which the first lady of 
Jahilia will wait years to take her terrible revenge. 

The Prophet's uncle Hamza has been walking home alone, his head bowed 
and grey in the twilight of that melancholy victory, when he hears a roar and 
looks up, to see a gigantic scarlet lion poised to leap at him from the high 
battlements of the city. He knows this beast, this fable. _The iridescence of 
its scarlet hide blends into the shimmering brightness of the desert sands. 
Through its nostrils it exhales the horror of the lonely places of the earth. It 
spits out pestilence, and when armies venture into the desert, it consumes 
them utterly_. Through the blue last light of evening he shouts at the beast, 
preparing, unarmed as he is, to meet his death. "Jump, you bastard, 
manticore. I've strangled big cats with my bare hands, in my time." When I 
was younger. When I was young. 

There is laughter behind him, and distant laughter echoing, or so it seems, 
from the battlements. He looks around him; the manticore has vanished 
from the ramparts. He is surrounded by a group of Jahilians in fancy dress, 
returning from the fair and giggling. "Now that these mystics have embraced 
our Lat, they are seeing new gods round every corner, no?" Hamza, 



understanding that the night will be full of terrors, returns home and calls for 
his battle sword. "More than anything in the world," he growls at the papery 
valet who has served him in war and peace for forty-four years, "I hate 
admitting that my enemies have a point. Damn sight better to kill the 
bastards, I've always thought. Neatest bloody solution." The sword has 
remained sheathed in its leather scabbard since the day of his conversion by 
his nephew, but tonight, he confides to the valet, "The lion is loose. Peace 
will have to wait." 

It is the last night of the festival of Ibrahim. Jahilia is masquerade and 
madness. The oiled fatty bodies of the wrestlers have completed their 
writhings and the seven poems have been nailed to the walls of the House of 
the Black Stone. Now singing whores replace the poets, and dancing whores, 
also with oiled bodies, are at work as well; night-wrestling replaces the 
daytime variety. The courtesans dance and sing in golden, bird-beaked 
masks, and the gold is reflected in their clients' shining eyes. Gold, gold 
everywhere, in the palms of the profiteering Jahilians and their libidinous 
guests, in the flaming sand--braziers, in the glowing walls of the night city. 
Hamza walks dolorously through the streets of gold, past pilgrims who lie 
unconscious while cutpurses earn their living. He hears the wine--blurred 
carousing through every golden-gleaming doorway, and feels the song and 
howling laughter and coin-chinkings hurting him like mortal insults. But he 
doesn't find what he's looking for, not here, so he moves away from the 
illuminated revelry of gold and begins to stalk the shadows, hunting the 
apparition of the lion. 

And finds, after hours of searching, what he knew would be waiting, in a 
dark corner of the city's outer walls, the thing of his vision, the red 
manticore with the triple row of teeth. The manticorc has blue eyes and a 
mannish face and its voice is half-- trumpet and half-flute. It is fast as the 
wind, its nails are corkscrew talons and its tail hurls poisone& quills. It loves 
to feed on human flesh ... a brawl is taking place. Knives hissing in the 
silence, at times the clash of metal against metal. Hamza recognizes the 
men under attack: Khalid, Salman, Bilal. A lion himself now, Hamza draws 
his sword, roars the silence into shreds, runs forward as fast as sixty— year- 
old legs will go. His friends' assailants are unrecognizable behind their masks. 
It has been a night of masks. Walking the debauched Jahilian streets, his 
heart full of bile, Hamza has seen men and women in the guise of eagles, 
jackals, horses, gryphons, salamanders, wart-- hogs, rocs; welling up from 
the murk of the alleys have come two-headed amphisbaenae and the winged 
bulls known as Assyrian sphinxes. Djinns, houris, demons populate the city 
on this night of phantasmagoria and lust. But only now, in this dark place, 
does he see the red masks he's been looking for. The manlion masks: he 
rushes towards his fate. 

ooo 



In the grip of a self-destructive unhappiness the three disciples had started 
drinking, and owing to their unfamiliarity with alcohol they were soon not 
just intoxicated but stupid-drunk. They stood in a small piazza and started 
abusing the passers--by, and after a while the water—carrier Khalid 
brandished his water-- skin, boasting. He could destroy the city, he carried 
the ultimate weapon. Water: it would cleanse Jahilia the filthy, wash it away, 
so that a new start could be made from the purified white sand. That was 
when the lion--men started chasing them, and after a long pursuit they were 
cornered, the booziness draining out of them on account of their fear, they 
were staring into the red masks of death when Hamza arrived just in time. 
. . . Gibreel floats above the city watching the fight. It's quickly over once 
Hamza gets to the scene. Two masked assailants run away, two lie dead. 
Bilal, Khalid and Salman have been cut, but not too badly. Graver than their 
wounds is the news behind the lion—masks of the dead. "Hind's brothers," 
Hamza recognizes. "Things are finishing for us now." 
Slayers of manticores, water-terrorists, the followers of Mahound sit and 
weep in the shadow of the city wall, 
ooo 

As for him, Prophet Messenger Businessman: his eyes are open now. He 
paces the inner courtyard of his house, his wife's house, and will not go in to 
her. She is almost seventy and feels these days more like a mother than a. 
She, the rich woman, who employed him to manage her caravans long ago. 
His management skills were the first things she liked about him. And after a 
time, they were in love. It isn't easy to be a brilliant, successful woman in a 
city where the gods are female but the females are merely goods. Men had 
either been afraid of her, or had thought her so strong that she didn't need 
their consideration. He hadn't been afraid, and had given her the feeling of 
constancy she needed. While he, the orphan, found in her many women in 
one: mother sister lover sibyl friend. When he thought himself crazy she was 
the one who believed in his visions. "It is the archangel," she told him, "not 
some fog out of your head. It is Gibreel, and you are the Messenger of God." 
He can't won't see her now. She watches him through a stonelatticed 
window. He can't stop walking, moves around the courtyard in a random 
sequence of unconscious geometries, his footsteps tracing out a series of 
ellipses, trapeziums, rhomboids, ovals, rings. While she remembers how he 
would return from the caravan trails full of stories heard at wayside oases. A 
prophet, Isa, born to a woman named Maryam, born of no man under a 
palm— tree in the desert. Stories that made his eyes shine, then fade into a 
distantness. She recalls his excitability: the passion with which he'd argue, 
all night if necessary, that the old nomadic times had been better than this 
city of gold where people exposed their baby daughters in the wilderness. In 
the old tribes even the poorest orphan would be cared for. God is in the 
desert, he'd say, not here in this miscarriage of a place. And she'd reply, 
Nobody's arguing, my love, it's late, and tomorrow there are the accounts. 



She has long ears; has already heard what he said about Lat, Uzza, Manat. 
So what? In the old days he wanted to protect the baby daughters of Jahilia; 
why shouldn't he take the daughters of Allah under his wing as well? But 
after asking herself this question she shakes her head and leans heavily on 
the cool wall beside her stone-screened window. While below her, her 
husband walks in pentagons, parallelograms, six—pointed stars, and then in 
abstract and increasingly labyrinthine patterns for which there are no names, 
as though unable to find a simple line. 

When she looks into the courtyard some moments later, however, he has 

gone. 

ooo 

The Prophet wakes between silk sheets, with a bursting headache, in a room 

he has never seen. Outside the window the sun is near its savage zenith, 

and silhouetted against the whiteness is a tall figure in a black hooded cloak, 

singing softly in a strong, low voice. The song is one that the women of 

Jahilia chorus as they drum the men to war. 

_Advance and we embrace you_, 

_embrace you, embrace you_, 

_advance and we embrace you_ 

_and soft carpets spread_. 

_Turn back and we desert you_, 

_we leave you, desert you_, 

_retreat and we'll not love you_, 

_not in love's bed_. 

He recognizes Hind's voice, sits up, and finds himself naked beneath the 
creamy sheet. He calls to her: "Was I attacked?" Hind turns to him, smiling 
her Hind smile. "Attacked?" she mimics him, and claps her hands for 
breakfast. Minions enter, bring, serve, remove, scurry off. Mahound is 
helped into a silken robe of black and gold; Hind, exaggeratedly, averts her 
eyes. "My head," he asks again. "Was I struck?" She stands at the window, 
her head hung low, playing the demure maid. "Oh, Messenger, Messenger," 
she mocks him. "What an ungallant Messenger it is. Couldn't you have come 
to my room consciously, of your own will? No, of course not, I repel you, I'm 
sure." He will not play her game. "Am I a prisoner?" he asks, and again she 
laughs at him. "Don't be a fool." And then, shrugging, relents: "I was 
walking the city streets last night, masked, to see the festivities, and what 
should I stumble over but your unconscious body? Like a drunk in the gutter, 
Mahound. I sent my servants for a litter and brought you home. Say thank 
you." 

"Thank you." 

"I don't think you were recognized," she says. "Or you'd be dead, maybe. 
You know how the city was last night. People overdo it. My own brothers 
haven't come home yet." 



It comes back to him now, his wild anguished walk in the corrupt city, 
staring at the souls he had supposedly saved, looking at the simurgh-effigies, 
the devil-masks, the behemoths and hippogriffs. The fatigue of that long day 
on which he climbed down from Mount Cone, walked to the town, underwent 
the strain of the events in the poetry marquee, -- and afterwards, the anger 
of the disciples, the doubt, -- the whole of it had overwhelmed him. "I 
fainted," he remembers. 

She comes and sits close to him on the bed, extends a finger, finds the gap 
in his robe, strokes his chest. "Fainted," she murmurs. "That's weakness, 
Mahound. Are you becoming weak?" 

She places the stroking finger over his lips before he can reply. "Don't say 
anything, Mahound. I am the Grandee's wife, and neither of us is your friend. 
My husband, however, is a weak man. In Jahilia they think he's cunning, but 
I know better. He knows I take lovers and he does nothing about it, because 
the temples are in my family's care. Lat's, Uzza's, Manat's. The -- shall I call 
them _mosques?_ -- of your new angels." She offers him melon cubes from 
a dish, tries to feed him with her fingers. He will not let her put the fruit into 
his mouth, takes the pieces with his own hand, eats. She goes on. "My last 
lover was the boy, Baal." She sees the rage on his face. "Yes," she says 
contentedly. "I heard he had got under your skin. But he doesn't matter. 
Neither he nor Abu Simbel is your equal. But I am." 

"I must go," he says. "Soon enough," she replies, returning to the window. 
At the perimeter of the city they are packing away the tents, the long camel- 
-trains are preparing to depart, convoys of carts are already heading away 
across the desert; the carnival is over. She turns to him again. 
"I am your equal," she repeats, "and also your opposite. I don't want you to 
become weak. You shouldn't have done what you did." 

"But you will profit," Mahound replies bitterly. "There's no threat now to your 
temple revenues." 

"You miss the point," she says softly, coming closer to him, bringing her face 
very close to his. "If you are for Allah, I am for Al-Lat. And she doesn't 
believe your God when he recognizes her. Her opposition to him is 
implacable, irrevocable, engulfing. The war between us cannot end in truce. 
And what a truce! Yours is a patronizing, condescending lord. Al-Lat hasn't 
the slightest wish to be his daughter. She is his equal, as I am yours. Ask 
Baal: he knows her. As he knows me." 
"So the Grandee will betray his pledge," Mahound says. 
"Who knows?" scoffs Hind. "He doesn't even know himself. He has to work 
out the odds. Weak, as I told you. But you know I'm telling the truth. 
Between Allah and the Three there can be no peace. I don't want it. I want 
the fight. To the death; that is the kind of idea I am. What kind are you?" 
"You are sand and I am water," Mahound says. "Water washes sand away." 
"And the desert soaks up water," Hind answers him. "Look around you." 



Soon after his departure the wounded men arrive at the Grandee's palace, 
having screwed up their courage to inform Hind that old Hamza has killed 
her brothers. But by then the Messenger is nowhere to be found; is heading, 
once again, slowly towards Mount Cone, 
ooo 

Gibreel, when he's tired, wants to murder his mother for giving him such a 
damn fool nickname, _angel_, what a word, he begs _what? whom?_ to be 
spared the dream--city of crumbling sandcastles and lions with three-tiered 
teeth, no more heart—washing of prophets or instructions to recite or 
promises of paradise, let there be an end to revelations, finito, khattam- 
shud. What he longs for: black, dreamless sleep. Mother-fucking dreams, 
cause of all the trouble in the human race, movies, too, if I was God I'd cut 
the imagination right out of people and then maybe poor bastards like me 
could get a good night's rest. Fighting against sleep, he forces his eyes to 
stay open, unblinking, until the visual purple fades off the retinas and sends 
him blind, but he's only human, in the end he falls down the rabbit-hole and 
there he is again, in Wonderland, up the mountain, and the businessman is 
waking up, and once again his wanting, his need, goes to work, not on my 
jaws and voice this time, but on my whole body; he diminishes me to his 
own size and pulls me in towards him, his gravitational field is unbelievable, 
as powerful as a goddamn megastar . . . and then Gibreel and the Prophet 
are wrestling, both naked, rolling over and over, in the cave of the fine white 
sand that rises around them like a veil. _As if he's learning me, searching 
me, as if I'm the one undergoing the test_. 

In a cave five hundred feet below the summit of Mount Cone, Mahound 
wrestles the archangel, hurling him from side to side, and let me tell you 
he's getting in _everywhere_, his tongue in my ear his fist around my balls, 
there was never a person with such a rage in him, he has to has to know he 
has to K N OW and I have nothing to tell him, he's twice as physically fit as I 
am and four times as knowledgeable, minimum, we may both have taught 
ourselves by listening a lot but as is plaintosee he's even a better listener 
than me; so we roll kick scratch, he's getting cut up quite a bit but of course 
my skin stays smooth as a baby, you can't snag an angel on a bloody thorn- 
bush, you can't bruise him on a rock. And they have an audience, there are 
djinns and afreets and all sorts of spooks sitting on the boulders to watch 
the fight, and in the sky are the three winged creatures, looking like herons 
or swans or just women depending on the tricks of the light . . . Mahound 
finishes it. He throws the fight. 

After they had wrestled for hours or even weeks Mahound was pinned down 
beneath the angel, it's what he wanted, it was his will filling me up and 
giving me the strength to hold him down, because archangels can't lose such 
fights, it wouldn't be right, it's only devils who get beaten in such circs, so 
the moment I got on top he started weeping for joy and then he did his old 



trick, forcing my mouth open and making the voice, the Voice, pour out of 

me once again, made it pour all over him, like sick. 

ooo 

At the end of his wrestling match with the Archangel Gibreel, the Prophet 
Mahound falls into his customary, exhausted, postrevelatory sleep, but on 
this occasion he revives more quickly than usual. When he comes to his 
senses in that high wilderness there is nobody to be seen, no winged 
creatures crouch on rocks, and hejumps to his feet, filled with the urgency of 
his news. "It was the Devil," he says aloud to the empty air, making it true 
by giving it voice. "The last time, it was Shaitan." This is what he has 
_heard_ in his _listening_, that he has been tricked, that the Devil came to 
him in the guise of the archangel, so that the verses he memorized, the 
ones he recited in the poetry tent, were not the real thing but its diabolic 
opposite, not godly, but satanic. He returns to the city as quickly as he can, 
to expunge the foul verses that reek of brimstone and sulphur, to strike 
them from the record for ever and ever, so that they will survive in just one 
or two unreliable collections of old traditions and orthodox interpreters will 
try and unwrite their story, but Gibreel, hovering-watching from his highest 
camera angle, knows one small detail, just one tiny thing that's a bit of a 
problem here, namely that _it was me both times, baba, me first and second 
also me_. From my mouth, both the statement and the repudiation, verses 
and converses, universes and reverses, the whole thing, and we all know 
how my mouth got worked. 

"First it was the Devil," Mahound mutters as he rushes to Jahilia. "But this 
time, the angel, no question. He wrestled me to the ground." 

ooo 

The disciples stop him in the ravines near the foot of Mount Cone to warn 
him of the fury of Hind, who is wearing white mourning garments and has 
loosened her black hair, letting it fly about her like a storm, or trail in the 
dust, erasing her footsteps so that she seems like an incarnation of the spirit 
of vengeance itself. They have all fled the city, and Hamza, too, is lying low; 
but the word is that Abu Simbel has not, as yet, acceded to his wife's pleas 
for the blood that washes away blood. He is still calculating the odds in the 
matter of Mahound and the goddesses Mahound, against his followers' 
advice, returns to Jahilia, going straight to the House of the Black Stone. The 
disciples follow him in spite of their fear. A crowd gathers in the hope of 
further scandal or dismemberment or some such entertainment. Mahound 
does not disappoint them. 

He stands in front of the statues of the Three and announces the abrogation 
of the verses which Shaitan whispered in his ear. These verses are banished 
from the true recitation, _al-qur"an_. New verses are thundered in their 
place. 

"Shall He have daughters and you sons?" Mahound recites. "That would be a 
fine division! 



"These are but names you have dreamed of, you and your fathers. Allah 
vests no authority in them." 

He leaves the dumbfounded House before it occurs to anybody to pick up, or 
throw, the first stone. 

ooo 

After the repudiation of the Satanic verses, the Prophet Mahound returns 
home to find a kind of punishment awaiting him. A kind of vengeance -- 
whose? Light or dark? Goodguy badguy? -- wrought, as is not unusual, upon 
the innocent. The Prophet's wife, seventy years old, sits by the foot of a 
stone—latticed window, sits upright with her back to the wall, dead. 
Mahound in the grip of his misery keeps himself to himself, hardly says a 
word for weeks. The Grandee of Jahilia institutes a policy of persecution that 
advances too slowly for Hind. The name of the new religion is _Submission_; 
now Abu Simbel decrees that its adherents must submit to being 
sequestered in the most wretched, hovel-filled quarter of the city; to a 
curfew; to a ban on employment. And there are many physical assaults, 
women spat upon in shops, the manhandling of the faithful by the gangs of 
young turks whom the Grandee secretly controls, fire thrown at night 
through a window to land amongst unwary sleepers. And, by one of the 
familiar paradoxes of history, the numbers of the faithful multiply, like a crop 
that miraculously flourishes as conditions of soil and climate grow worse and 
worse. 

An offer is received, from the citizens of the oasis—settlement of Yathrib to 
the north: Yathrib will shelter those— who-submit, if they wish to leave 
Jahilia. Hamza is of the opinion that they must go. "You'll never finish your 
Message here, nephew, take my word. Hind won't be happy till she's ripped 
out your tongue, to say nothing of my balls, excuse me." Mahound, alone 
and full of echoes in the house of his bereavement, gives his consent, and 
the faithful depart to make their plans. Khalid the water-carrier hangs back 
and the hollow-eyed Prophet waits for him to speak. Awkwardly, he says: 
"Messenger, I doubted you. But you were wiser than we knew. First we said, 
Mahound will never compromise, and you compromised. Then we said, 
Mahound has betrayed us, but you were bringing us a deeper truth. You 
brought us the Devil himself, so that we could witness the workings of the 
Evil One, and his overthrow by the Right. You have enriched our faith. I am 
sorry for what I thought." 

Mahound moves away from the sunlight falling through the window. "Yes." 
Bitterness, cynicism. "It was a wonderful thing I did. Deeper truth. Bringing 
you the Devil. Yes, that sounds like me." 

ooo 

From the peak of Mount Cone, Gibreel watches the faithful escaping Jahilia, 
leaving the city of aridity for the place of cool palms and water, water, water. 
In small groups, almost empty-- handed, they move across the empire of 
the sun, on this first day of the first year at the new beginning of Time, 



which has itself been born again, as the old dies behind them and the new 

waits ahead. And one day Mahound himself slips away. When his escape is 

discovered, Baal composes a valedictory ode: 

_What kind of idea_ 

_does "Submission" seem today?_ 

_One full of fear_. 

_An idea that runs away_. 

Mahound has reached his oasis; Gibreel is not so lucky. Often, now, he finds 
himself alone on the summit of Mount Cone, washed by the cold, falling 
stars, and then they fall upon him from the night sky, the three winged 
creatures, Lat Uzza Manat, flapping around his head, clawing at his eyes, 
biting, whipping him with their hair, their wings. He puts up his hands to 
protect himself, but their revenge is tireless, continuing whenever he rests, 
whenever he drops his guard. He struggles against them, but they are faster, 
nimbler, winged. 

He has no devil to repudiate. Dreaming, he cannot wish them away. 



Ill Ellowen Deeowen 



1 

I know what a ghost is, the old woman affirmed silently. Her name was Rosa 
Diamond; she was eighty-eight years old; and she was squinting beakily 
through her salt-caked bedroom windows, watching the full moon's sea. And 
I know what it isn't, too, she nodded further, it isn't a scarification or a 
flapping sheet, so pooh and pish to all _that_ bunkum. What's a ghost? 
Unfinished business, is what. -- At which the old lady, six feet tall, straight-- 
backed, her hair hacked short as any man's, jerked the corners of her mouth 
downwards in a satisfied, tragedy-mask pout, pulled a knitted blue shawl 
tight around bony shoulders, -- and closed, for a moment, her sleepless eyes, 
to pray for the past's return. Come on, you Norman ships, she begged: let's 
have you, Willie-the-Conk. 

Nine hundred years ago all this was under water, this portioned shore, this 
private beach, its shingle rising steeply towards the little row of flaky-paint 
villas with their peeling boathouses crammed full of deckchairs, empty 
picture frames, ancient tuckboxes stuffed with bundles of letters tied up in 
ribbons, mothballed silk--and-lace lingerie, the tearstained reading matter of 
once--young girls, lacrosse sticks, stamp albums, and all the buried 
treasure—chests of memories and lost time. The coastline had changed, had 
moved a mile or more out to sea, leaving the first Norman castle stranded 
far from water, lapped now by marshy land that afflicted with all manner of 
dank and boggy agues the poor who lived there on their whatstheword 
_estates_. She, the old lady, saw the castle as the ruin of a fish betrayed by 
an antique ebbing tide, as a sea-monster petrified by time. Nine hundred 
years! Nine centuries past, the Norman fleet had sailed right through this 
Englishwoman's home. On clear nights when the moon was full, she waited 
for its shining, revenant ghost. 

Best place to see 'em come, she reassured herself, grandstand view. 
Repetition had become a comfort in her antiquity; the well-worn phrases, 
_unfinished business, grandstand view_, made her feel solid, unchanging, 
sempiternal, instead of the creature of cracks and absences she knew herself 
to be. -- When the full moon sets, the dark before the dawn, that's their 
moment. Billow of sail, flash of oars, and the Conqueror himself at the 
flagship's prow, sailing up the beach between the barnacled wooden 
breakwaters and a few inverted sculls. -- O, I've seen things in my time, 
always had the gift, the phantom-sight. -- The Conqueror in his pointy 
metal-nosed hat, passing through her front door, gliding betwixt the 
cakestands and antimacassared sofas, like an echo resounding faintly 
through that house of remembrances and yearnings; then falling silent; _as 
the grave_. 



-- Once as a girl on Battle Hill, she was fond of recounting, always in the 
same time--polished words, -- once as a solitary child, I found myself, quite 
suddenly and with no sense of strangeness, in the middle of a war. 
Longbows, maces, pikes. The flaxen-Saxon boys, cut down in their sweet 
youth. Harold Arroweye and William with his mouth full of sand. Yes, always 
the gift, the phantom-sight. -- The story of the day on which the child Rosa 
had seen a vision of the battle of Hastings had become, for the old woman, 
one of the defining landmarks of her being, though it had been told so often 
that nobody, not even the teller, could confidently swear that it was true. _I 
long for them sometimes_, ran Rosa's practised thoughts. _l_es beaux jours: 
the dear, dead days_. She closed, once more, her reminiscent eyes. When 
she opened them, she saw, down by the water's edge, no denying it, 
something beginning to move. 

What she said aloud in her excitement: "I don't believe it!" — "It isn't true!" 
-- "He's never _here!_" -- On unsteady feet, with bumping chest, Rosa went 
for her hat, cloak, stick. While, on the winter seashore, Gibreel Farishta 
awoke with a mouth full of, no, not sand. 
Snow. 

ooo 

Ptui! 

Gibreel spat; leapt up, as if propelled by expectorated slush; wished 
Chamcha -- as has been reported — many happy returns of the day; and 
commenced to beat the snow from sodden purple sleeves. "God, yaar," he 
shouted, hopping from foot to foot, "no wonder these people grow hearts of 
bloody ice." 

Then, however, the pure delight of being surrounded by such a quantity of 
snow quite overcame his first cynicism -- for he was a tropical man -- and he 
started capering about, saturnine and soggy, making snowballs and hurling 
them at his prone companion, envisioning a snowman, and singing a wild, 
swooping rendition of the carol "Jingle Bells". The first hint of light was in the 
sky, and on this cosy sea-coast danced Lucifer, the morning's star. 
His breath, it should be mentioned, had somehow or other wholly ceased to 
smell . . . 

"Come on, baby," cried invincible Gibreel, in whose behaviour the reader 
may, not unreasonably, perceive the delirious, dislocating effects of his 
recent fall. "Rise "n" shine! Let's take this place by storm." Turning his back 
on the sea, blotting out the bad memory in order to make room for the next 
things, passionate as always for newness, he would have planted (had he 
owned one) a flag, to claim in the name of whoknowswho this white country, 
his new-found land. "Spoono," he pleaded, "shift, baba, or are you bloody 
dead?" Which being uttered brought the speaker to (or at least towards) his 
senses. He bent over the other's prostrate form, did not dare to touch. "Not 
now, old Chumch," he urged. "Not when we came so far." 



Saladin: was not dead, but weeping. The tears of shock freezing on his face. 
And all his body cased in a fine skin of ice, smooth as glass, like a bad 
dream come true. In the miasmic semi—consciousness induced by his low 
body temperature he was possessed by the nightmare-fear of cracking, of 
seeing his blood bubbling up from the ice-breaks, of his flesh coming away 
with the shards. He was full of questions, did we truly, I mean, with your 
hands flapping, and then the waters, you don't mean to tell me they 
_actually_, like in the movies, when Charlton Heston stretched out his staff, 
so that we could, across the ocean—floor, it never happened, couldn't have, 
but if not then how, or did we in some way underwater, escorted by the 
mermaids, the sea passing through us as if we were fish or ghosts, was that 
the truth, yes or no, I need to have to.. . but when his eyes opened the 
questions acquired the indistinctness of dreams, so that he could no longer 
grasp them, their tails flicked before him and vanished like submarine fins. 
He was looking up at the sky, and noticed that it was the wrong colour 
entirely, blood-orange flecked with green, and the snow was blue as ink. He 
blinked hard but the colours refused to change, giving rise to the notion that 
he had fallen out of the sky into some wrongness, some other place, not 
England or perhaps not-England, some counterfeit zone, rotten borough, 
altered state. Maybe, he considered briefly: Hell? No, no, he reassured 
himself as unconsciousness threatened, that can't be it, not yet, you aren't 
dead yet; but dying. 
Well then: a transit lounge. 

He began to shiver; the vibration grew so intense that it occurred to him 
that he might break up under the stress, like a, like a, plane. 
Then nothing existed. He was in a void, and if he were to survive he would 
have to construct everything from scratch, would have to invent the ground 
beneath his feet before he could take a step, only there was no need now to 
worry about such matters, because here in front of him was the inevitable: 
the tall, bony figure of Death, in a wide-brimmed straw hat, with a dark 
cloak flapping in the breeze. Death, leaning on a silverheaded cane, wearing 
olive-green Wellington boots. 

"What do you imagine yourselves to be doing here?" Death wanted to know. 
"This is private property. There's a sign." Said in a woman's voice that was 
somewhat tremulous and more than somewhat thrilled. 
A few moments later, Death bent over him -- _to kiss me_, he panicked 
silently. _To suck the breath from my body_. He made small, futile 
movements of protest. 

"He's alive all right," Death remarked to, who was it, Gibreel. "But, my dear. 
His breath: what a pong. When did he last clean his teeth?" 

ooo 

One man's breath was sweetened, while another's, by an equal and opposite 
mystery, was soured. What did they expect? Falling like that out of the sky: 
did they imagine there would be no sideeffects? Higher Powers had taken an 



interest, it should have been obvious to them both, and such Powers (I am, 
of course, speaking of myself) have a mischievous, almost a wanton attitude 
to tumbling flies. And another thing, let's be clear: great falls change people. 
You think _they_ fell a long way? In the matter of tumbles, I yield pride of 
place to no personage, whether mortal or im--. From clouds to ashes, down 
the chimney you might say, from heavenlight to hellfire. . . under the stress 
of a long plunge, I was saying, mutations are to be expected, not all of them 
random. Unnatural selections. Not much of a price to pay for survival, for 
being reborn, for becoming new, and at their age at that. 
What? I should enumerate the changes? 
Good breath/bad breath. 

And around the edges of Gibreel Farishta's head, as he stood with his back 
to the dawn, it seemed to Rosa Diamond that she discerned a faint, but 
distinctly golden, _glow_. 

And were those bumps, at Chamcha's temples, under his sodden and still-in- 
place bowler hat? 
And, and, and. 

ooo 

When she laid eyes on the bizarre, satyrical figure of Gibreel Farishta 
prancing and dionysiac in the snow, Rosa Diamond did not think of _say it_ 
angels. Sighting him from her window, through salt--cloudy glass and age- 
clouded eyes, she felt her heart kick out, twice, so painfully that she feared 
it might stop; because in that indistinct form she seemed to discern the 
incarnation of her soul's most deeply buried desire. She forgot the Norman 
invaders as if they had never been, and struggled down a slope of 
treacherous pebbles, too quickly for the safety of her not-quitenonagenarian 
limbs, so that she could pretend to scold the impossible stranger for 
trespassing on her land. 

Usually she was implacable in defence of her beloved fragment of the coast, 
and when summer weekenders strayed above the high tide line she 

descended upon them I i ke a wolf on the fold_, her phrase for it, to explain 

and to demand: — This is my garden, do you see. — And if they grew brazen, 
-- getoutofitsillyoldmoo, itsthesoddingbeach, -- she would return home to 
bring out a long green garden hose and turn it remorselessly upon their 
tartan blankets and plastic cricket bats and bottles of sun--tan lotion, she 
would smash their children's sandcastles and soak their liver-- sausage 
sandwiches, smiling sweetly all the while: _You won't mind if I fust water my 
lawn?_ . . . O, she was a One, known in the village, they couldn't lock her 
away in any old folks' home, sent her whole family packing when they dared 
to suggest it, never darken her doorstep, she told them, cut the whole lot off 
without a penny or a by your leave. All on her own now, she was, never a 
visitor from week to blessed week, not even Dora Shufflebotham who went 
in and did for her all those years, Dora passed over September last, may she 
rest, still it's a wonder at her age how the old trout manages, all those stairs, 



she may be a bit of a bee but give the devil her due, there's many"s'd go 
barmy being that alone. 

For Gibreel there was neither a hosepipe nor the _sharp end_ of her tongue. 
Rosa uttered token words of reproof, held her nostrils while examining the 
fallen and newly sulphurous Saladin (who had not, at this point, removed his 
bowler hat), and then, with an access of shyness which she greeted with 
nostalgic astonishment, stammered an invitation, yyou bbetter bring your 
ffriend in out of the cccold, and stamped back up the shingle to put the 
kettle on, grateful to the bite of the winter air for reddening her cheeks and 
_saving_, in the old comforting phrase, _her blushes_. 

ooo 

As a young man Saladin Chamcha had possessed a face of quite exceptional 
innocence, a face that did not seem ever to have encountered disillusion or 
evil, with skin as soft and smooth as a princess's palm. It had served him 
well in his dealings with women, and had, in point of fact, been one of the 
first reasons his future wife Pamela Lovelace had given for falling in love 
with him. "So round and cherubic," she marvelled, cupping her hands under 
his chin. "Like a rubber ball." 

He was offended. "I've got bones," he protested. "Bone _structure_." 
"Somewhere in there," she conceded. "Everybody does." 
After that he was haunted for a time by the notion that he looked like a 
featureless jellyfish, and it was in large part to assuage this feeling that he 
set about developing the narrow, haughty demeanour that was now second 
nature to him. It was, therefore, a matter of some consequence when, on 
arising from a long slumber racked by a series of intolerable dreams, 
prominent among which were images of Zeeny Vakil, transformed into a 
mermaid, singing to him from an iceberg in tones of agonizing sweetness, 
lamenting her inability to join him on dry land, calling him, calling; — but 
when he went to her she shut him up fast in the heart of her ice-mountain, 
and her song changed to one of triumph and revenge. . . it was, I say, a 
serious matter when Saladin Chamcha woke up, looked into a mirror framed 
in blue-and-gold Japonaiserie lacquer, and found that old cherubic face 
staring out at him once again; while, at his temples, he observed a brace of 
fearfully discoloured swellings, indications that he must have suffered, at 
some point in his recent adventures, a couple of mighty blows. 
Looking into the mirror at his altered face, Chamcha attempted to remind 
himself of himself. I am a real man, he told the mirror, with a real history 
and a planned-out future. I am a man to whom certain things are of 
importance: rigour, self—discipline, reason, the pursuit of what is noble 
without recourse to that old crutch, God. The ideal of beauty, the possibility 
of exaltation, the mind. I am: a married man. But in spite of his litany, 
perverse thoughts insisted on visiting him. As for instance: that the world 
did not exist beyond that beach down there, and, now, this house. That if he 
weren't careful, if he rushed matters, he would fall off the edge, into clouds. 



Things had to be _made_. Or again: that if he were to telephone his home, 
right now, as he should, if he were to inform his loving wife that he was not 
dead, not blown to bits in mid-air but right here, on solid ground, if he were 
to do this eminently sensible thing, the person who answered the phone 
would not recognize his name. Or thirdly: that the sound of footsteps ringing 
in his ears, distant footsteps, but coming closer, was not some temporary 
tinnitus caused by his fall, but the noise of some approaching doom, drawing 
closer, letter by letter, ellowen, deeowen, London. _Here I am, in 
Grandmother's house. Her big eyes, hands, teeth_. 

There was a telephone extension on his bedside table. There, he admonished 
himself. Pick it up, dial, and your equilibrium will be restored. Such 
maunderings: they aren't like you, not worthy of you. Think of her grief; call 
her now. 

It was night-time. He didn't know the hour. There wasn't a clock in the room 
and his wristwatch had disappeared somewhere along the line. Should he 
shouldn't he? -- He dialled the nine numbers. A man's voice answered on the 
fourth ring. 

"What the hell?" Sleepy, unidentifiable, familiar. 
"Sorry," Saladin Chamcha said. "Excuse, please. Wrong number." 
Staring at the telephone, he found himself remembering a drama production 
seen in Bombay, based on an English original, a story by, by, he couldn't put 
his finger on the name, Tennyson? No, no. Somerset Maugham? -- To hell 
with it. — In the original and now authorless text, a man, long thought dead, 
returns after an absence of many years, like a living phantom, to his former 
haunts. He visits his former home at night, surreptitiously, and looks in 
through an open window. He finds that his wife, believing herself widowed, 
has re-married. On the window-sill he sees a child's toy. He spends a period 
of time standing in the darkness, wrestling with his feelings; then picks the 
toy off the ledge; and departs forever, without making his presence known. 
In the Indian version, the story had been rather different. The wife had 
married her husband's best friend. The returning husband arrived at the 
door and marched in, expecting nothing. Seeing his wife and his old friend 
sitting together, he failed to understand that they were married. He thanked 
his friend for comforting his wife; but he was home now, and so all was well. 
The married couple did not know how to tell him the truth; it was, finally, a 
servant who gave the game away. The husband, whose long absence was 
apparently due to a bout of amnesia, reacted to the news of the marriage by 
announcing that he, too, must surely have re-married at some point during 
his long absence from home; unfortunately, however, now that the memory 
of his former life had returned he had forgotten what had happened during 
the years of his disappearance. He went off to ask the police to trace his new 
wife, even though he could remember nothing about her, not her eyes, not 
the simple fact of her existence. 
The curtain fell. 



Saladin Chamcha, alone in an unknown bedroom in unfamiliar red-and-white 
striped pyjamas, lay face downwards on a narrow bed and wept. "Damn all 
Indians," he cried into the muffling bedclothes, his fists punching at f ri My — 
edged pillowcases from Harrods in Buenos Aires so fiercely that the fifty- 
year—old fabric was ripped to shreds. "_What the hell_. The vulgarity of it, 
the _sod it sod it_ indelicacy. _What the hell_. That bastard, those bastards, 
their lack of _bastard_ taste." 

It was at this moment that the police arrived to arrest him. 
ooo 

On the night after she had taken the two of them in from the beach, Rosa 
Diamond stood once again at the nocturnal window of her old woman's 
insomnia, contemplating the nine-hundredyear--old sea. The smelly one had 
been sleeping ever since they put him to bed, with hot-water bottles packed 
in tightly around him, best thing for him, let him get his strength. She had 
put them upstairs, Chamcha in the spare room and Gibreel in her late 
husband's old study, and as she watched the great shining plain of the sea 
she could hear him moving up there, amid the ornithological prints and bird- 
call whistles of the former Henry Diamond, the bolas and bullwhip and aerial 
photographs of the Los Alamos estancia far away and long ago, a man's 
footsteps in that room, how reassuring they felt. Farishta was pacing up and 
down, avoiding sleep, for reasons of his own. And below his footfall Rosa, 
looking up at the ceiling, called him in a whisper by a long-unspoken name. 
Martin she said. His last name the same as that of his country's deadliest 
snake, the viper. The vibora, _de la Cruz_. 

At once she saw the shapes moving on the beach, as if the forbidden name 
had conjured up the dead. Not again, she thought, and went for her opera- 
glasses. She returned to find the beach full of shadows, and this time she 
was afraid, because whereas the Norman fleet came sailing, when it came, 
proudly and openly and without recourse to subterfuge, these shades were 
sneaky, emitting stifled imprecations and alarming, muted yaps and barks, 
they seemed headless, crouching, arms and legs a--dangle like giant, 
unshelled crabs. Scuttling, sidelong, heavy boots crunching on shingle. Lots 
of them. She saw them reach her boathouse on which the fading image of 
an eyepatched pirate grinned and brandished a cutlass, and that was too 
much, _I'm not having it_, she decided, and, stumbling downstairs for warm 
clothing, she fetched the chosen weapon of her retribution: a long coil of 
green garden hose. At her front door she called out in a clear voice. "I can 
see you quite plainly. Come out, come out, whoever you are." 
They switched on seven suns and blinded her, and then she panicked, 
illuminated by the seven blue-white floodlights around which, like fireflies or 
satellites, there buzzed a host of smaller lights: lanterns torches cigarettes. 
Her head was spinning, and for a moment she lost her ability to distinguish 
between _then_ and _now_, in her consternation she began to say Put out 
that light, don't you know there's a blackout, you'll be having Jerry down on 



us if you carry on so. "I'm raving," she realized disgustedly, and banged the 
tip of her stick into her doormat. Whereupon, as if by magic, policemen 
materialized in the dazzling circle of light. 

It turned out that somebody had reported a suspicious person on the beach, 
remember when they used to come in fishingboats, the illegals, and thanks 
to that single anonymous telephone call there were now fifty-seven 
uniformed constables combing the beach, their flashlights swinging crazily in 
the dark, constables from as far away as Hastings Eastbourne Bexhill-upon- 
Sea, even a deputation from Brighton because nobody wanted to miss the 
fun, the thrill of the chase. Fifty-seven beachcombers were accompanied by 
thirteen dogs, all sniffing the sea air and lifting excited legs. While up at the 
house away from the great posse of men and dogs, Rosa Diamond found 
herself gazing at the five constables guarding the exits, front door, ground- 
floor windows, scullery door, in case the putative miscreant attempted an 
alleged escape; and at the three men in plain clothes, plain coats and plain 
hats with faces to match; and in front of the lot of them, not daring to look 
her in the eye, young Inspector Lime, shuffling his feet and rubbing his nose 
and looking older and more bloodshot than his forty years. She tapped him 
on the chest with the end of her stick, _at this time of night, Frank, u"hat's 
the meaning of_, but he wasn't going to allow her to boss him around, not 
tonight, not with the men from the immigration watching his every move, so 
he drew himself up and pulled in his chins. 

"Begging your pardon, Mrs. D. -- certain allegations, -- information laid 
before us, -- reason to believe, -- merit investigation, -- necessary to search 
your, -- a warrant has been obtained." 

"Don't be absurd, Frank dear," Rosa began to say, but just then the three 
men with the plain faces drew themselves up and seemed to stiffen, each of 
them with one leg slightly raised, like pointer dogs; the first began to emit 
an unusual hiss of what sounded like pleasure, while a soft moan escaped 
from the lips of the second, and the third commenced to roll his eyes in an 
oddly contented way. Then they all pointed past Rosa Diamond, into her 
floodlit hallway, where Mr. Saladin Chamcha stood, his left hand holding up 
his pyjamas because a button had come off when he hurled himself on to his 
bed. With his right hand he was rubbing at an eye. 

"Bingo," said the hissing man, while the moaner clasped .his hands beneath 
his chin to indicate that all his prayers had been answered, and the roller of 
eyes shouldered past Rosa Diamond, without standing on ceremony, except 
that he did mutter, "Madam, pardon _me_." 

Then there was a flood, and Rosa was jammed into a corner of her own 
sitting-room by that bobbing sea of police helmets, so that she could no 
longer make out Saladin Chamcha or hear what he was saying. She never 



heard him explain about the detonation of the _Bostan_ -- there's been a 
mistake, he cried, I'm not one of your fishing-boat sneakers-in, not one of 
your ugandokenyattas, me. The policemen began to grin, I see, sir, at thirty 
thousand feet, and then you swam ashore. You have the right to remain 
silent, they tittered, but quite soon they burst out into uproarious guffaws, 
we've got a right one here and no mistake. But Rosa couldn't make out 
Saladin's protests, the laughing policemen got in the way, you've got to 
believe me, I'm a British, he was saying, with right of abode, too, but when 
he couldn't produce a passport or any other identifying document they 
began to weep with mirth, the tears streaming down even the blank faces of 
the plain-clothes men from the immigration service. Of course, don't tell me, 
they giggled, they fell out of your jacket during your tumble, or did the 
mermaids pick your pocket in the sea? Rosa couldn't see, in that laughter- 
heaving surge of men and dogs, what uniformed arms might be doing to 
Chamcha's arms, or fists to his stomach, or boots to his shins; nor could she 
be sure if it was his voice crying out or just the howling of the dogs. But she 
did, finally, hear his voice rise in a last, despairing shout: "Don't any of you 
watch TV? Don't you see? I'm Maxim. Maxim Alien." 
"So you are," said the popeyed officer. "And I am Kermit the Frog." 
What Saladin Chamcha never said, not even when it was clear that 
something had gone badly wrong: "Here is a London number," he neglected 
to inform the arresting policemen. "At the other end of the line you will find, 
to vouch for me, for the truth of what I'm saying, my lovely, white, English 
wife." No, sir. _What the hell_. 

Rosa Diamond gathered her strength. "Just one moment, Frank Lime," she 
sang out. "You look here," but the three plain men had begun their bizarre 
routine of hiss moan roll--eye once again, and in the sudden silence of that 
room the eye-roller pointed a trembling finger at Chamcha and said, "Lady, 
if it's proof you're after, you couldn't do better than _those_." 
Saladin Chamcha, following the line of Popeye's pointing finger, raised his 
hands to his forehead, and then he knew that he had woken into the most 
fearsome of nightmares, a nightmare that had only just begun, because 
there at his temples, growing longer by the moment, and sharp enough to 
draw blood, were two new, goaty, unarguable horns. 

ooo 

Before the army of policemen took Saladin Chamcha away into his new life, 
there was one more unexpected occurrence. Gibreel Farishta, seeing the 
blaze of lights and hearing the delirious laughter of the law—enforcement 
officers, came downstairs in a maroon smoking jacket and jodhpurs, chosen 
from Henry Diamond's wardrobe. Smelling faintly of mothballs, he stood on 
the first-floor landing and observed the proceedings without comment. He 
stood there unnoticed until Chamcha, handcuffed and on his way out to the 
Black Maria, barefoot, still clutching his pyjamas, caught sight of him and 
cried out, "Gibreel, for the love of God tell them what's what." 



Hisser Moaner Popeye turned eagerly towards Gibreel. "And who might this 
be?" inquired Inspector Lime. "Another skydiver?" 

But the words died on his lips, because at that moment the floodlights were 
switched off, the order to do so having been given when Chamcha was 
handcuffed and taken in charge, and in the aftermath of the seven suns it 
became clear to everyone there that a pale, golden light was emanating 
from the direction of the man in the smoking jacket, was in fact streaming 
softly outwards from a point immediately behind his head. Inspector Lime 
never referred to that light again, and if he had been asked about it would 
have denied ever having seen such a thing, a halo, in the late twentieth 
century, pull the other one. 

But at any rate, when Gibreel asked, "What do these men want?", every 
man there was seized by the desire to answer his question in literal, detailed 
terms, to reveal their secrets, as if he were, as if, but no, ridiculous, they 
would shake their heads for weeks, until they had all persuaded themselves 
that they had done as they did for purely logical reasons, he was Mrs. 
Diamond's old friend, the two of them had found the rogue Chamcha 
halfdrowned on the beach and taken him in for humanitarian reasons, no call 
to harass either Rosa or Mr. Farishta any further, a more reputable looking 
gentleman you couldn't wish to see, in his smoking jacket and his, his, well, 
eccentricity never was a crime, anyhow. 
"Gibreel," said Saladin Chamcha, "help." 

But Gibreel's eye had been caught by Rosa Diamond. He looked at her, and 
could not look away. Then he nodded, and went back upstairs. No attempt 
was made to stop him. 

When Chamcha reached the Black Maria, he saw the traitor, Gibreel Farishta, 
looking down at him from the little balcony outside Rosa's bedroom, and 
there wasn't any light shining around the bastard's head. 

2 

_Kan an ma kan/Fi qadim azzaman_ ... It was so, it was not, in a time long 
forgot, that there lived in the silver-land of Argentina a certain Don Enrique 
Diamond, who knew much about birds and little about women, and his wife, 
Rosa, who knew nothing about men but a good deal about love. One day it 
so happened that when the sehora was out riding, sitting sidesaddle and 
wearing a hat with a feather in it, she arrived at the Diamond estancia's 
great stone gates, which stood insanely in the middle of the empty pampas, 
to find an ostrich running at her as hard as it could, running for its life, with 
all the tricks and variations it could think of; for the ostrich is a crafty bird, 
difficult to catch. A little way behind the ostrich was a cloud of dust full of 
the noises of hunting men, and when the ostrich was within six feet of her 
the cloud sent bolas to wrap around its legs and bring it crashing to the 
ground at her grey mare's feet. The man who dismounted to kill the bird 
never took his eyes off Rosa's face. He took a silver-hafted knife from a 



scabbard at his belt and plunged it into the bird's throat, all the way up to 
the hilt, and he did it without once looking at the dying ostrich, staring into 
Rosa Diamond's eyes while he knelt on the wide yellow earth. His name was 
Martin de la Cruz. 

After Chamcha had been taken away, Gibreel Farishta often wondered about 
his own behaviour. In that dreamlike moment when he had been trapped by 
the eyes of the old Englishwoman it had seemed to him that his will was no 
longer his own to command, that somebody else's needs were in charge. 
Owing to the bewildering nature of recent events, and also to his 
determination to stay awake as much as possjble, it was a few days before 
he connected what was going on to the world behind his eyelids, and only 
then did he understand that he had to get away, because the universe of his 
nightmares had begun to leak into his waking life, and if he was not careful 
he would never manage to begin again, to be reborn with her, through her, 
Alleluia, who had seen the roof of the world. 

He was shocked to realize that he had made no attempt to contact Allie at all; 
or to help Chamcha in his time of need. Nor had he been at all perturbed by 
the appearance on Saladin's head of a pair of fine new horns, a thing that 
should surely have occasioned some concern. He had been in some sort of 
trance, and when he asked the old dame what she thought of it all she 
smiled weirdly and told him that there was nothing new under the sun, she 
had seen things, the apparitions of men with horned helmets, in an ancient 
land like England there was no room for new stories, every blade of turf had 
already been walked over a hundred thousand times. For long periods of the 
day her talk became rambling and confused, but at other times she insisted 
on cooking him huge heavy meals, shepherd's pies, rhubarb crumble with 
thick custard, thick--gravied hotpots, all manner of weighty soups. And at all 
times she wore an air of inexplicable contentment, as if his presence had 
satisfied her in some deep, unlookedfor way. He went shopping in the village 
with her; people stared; she ignored them, waving her imperious stick. The 
days passed. Gibreel did not leave. 

"Blasted English mame," he told himself. "Some type of extinct species. 
What the hell am I doing here?" But stayed, held by unseen chains. While 
she, at every opportunity, sang an old song, in Spanish, he couldn't 
understand a word. Some sorcery there? Some ancient Morgan Le Fay 
singing a young Merlin into her crystal cave? Gibreel headed for the door; 
Rosa piped up; he stopped in his tracks. "Why not, after all," he shrugged. 
"The old woman needs company. Faded grandeur, I swear! Look what she's 
come to here. Anyhow, I need the rest. Gather my forces. Just a coupla 
days." 

In the evenings they would sit in that drawing-room stuffed with silver 
ornaments, including on the wall a certain silver-hafted knife, beneath the 
plaster bust of Henry Diamond that stared down from the top of the corner 
cabinet, and when the grandfather clock struck six he would pour two 



glasses of sherry and she would begin to talk, but not before she said, as 
predictably as clockwork, _Grandfather is always four minutes late, for good 
manners, he doesn't like to be too punctual_. Then she began without 
bothering with onceuponatime, and whether it was all true or all false he 
could see the fierce energy that was going into the telling, the last desperate 
reserves of her will that she was putting into her story, _the only bright time 
I can remember_, she told him, so that he perceived that this memory- 
jumbled rag-bag of material was in fact the very heart of her, her self- 
portrait, the way she looked in the mirror when nobody else was in the room, 
and that the silver land of the past was her preferred abode, not this 
dilapidated house in which she was constantly bumping into things, -- 
knocking over coffee-tables, bruising herself on doorknobs -- bursting into 
tears, and crying out: _Everything shrinks_. 

When she sailed to Argentina in 1935 as the bride of the Anglo-Argentine 
Don Enrique of Los Alamos, he pointed to the ocean and said, that's the 
pampa. You can't tell how big it is by looking at it. You have to travel 
through it, the unchangingness, day after day. In some parts the wind is 
strong as a fist, but it's completely silent, it'll knock you flat but you'll never 
hear a thing. No trees is why: not an ombu, not a poplar, nada. And you 
have to watch out for ombu leaves, by the way. Deadly poison. The wind 
won't kill you but the leaf-juice can. She clapped her hands like a child: 
Honestly, Henry, silent winds, poisonous leaves. You make it sound like a 
fairy-story. Henry, fairhaired, soft-bodied, wide-eyed and ponderous, looked 
appalled. _Oh, no_, he said. _It's not so bad as that_. 
She arrived in that immensity, beneath that infinite blue vault of sky, 
because Henry popped the question and she gave the only answer that a 
forty-year-old spinster could. But when she arrived she asked herself a 
bigger question: of what was she capable in all that space? What did she 
have the courage for, how could she _expand?_ To be good or bad, she told 
herself: but to be _new_. Our neighbour Doctor Jorge Babington, she told 
Gibreel, never liked me, you know, he would tell me tales of the British in 
South America, always such gay blades, he said contemptuously, spies and 
brigands and looters. _Are you such exotics in your cold England?_ he asked 
her, and answered his own question, _sehora, I don't think so. Crammed 
into that coffin of an island, you must find wider horizons to express these 
secret selves_. 

Rosa Diamond's secret was a capacity for love so great that it soon became 
plain that her poor prosaic Henry would never fulfil it, because whatever 
romance there was in that jellied frame was reserved for birds. Marsh hawks, 
screamers, snipe. In a small rowing boat on the local lagunas he spent his 
happiest days amid the buirushes with his field-glasses to his eyes. Once on 
the train to Buenos Aires he embarrassed Rosa by demonstrating his 
favourite bird-calls in the dining-car, cupping his hands around his mouth: 
sleepyhead bird, vanduria ibis, trupial. Why can't you love me this way, she 



wanted to ask. But never did, because for Henry she was a good sort, and 
passion was an eccentricity of other races. She became the generalissimo of 
the homestead, and tried to stifle her wicked longings. At night she took to 
walking out into the pampa and lying on her back to look at the galaxy 
above, and sometimes, under the influence of that bright flow of beauty, she 
would begin to tremble all over, to shudder with a deep delight, and to hum 
an unknown tune, and this star-music was as close as she came to joy. 
Gibreel Farishta: felt her stories winding round him like a web, holding him 
in that lost world where _fifty sat down to dinner every day, what men they 
were, our gauchos, nothing servile there, very fierce and proud, very. Pure 
carnivores; you can see it in the pictures_. During the long nights of their 
insomnia she told him about the heat-haze that would come over the pampa 
so that the few trees stood out like islands and a rider looked like a 
mythological being, galloping across the surface of the ocean. _It was like 
the ghost of the sea_. She told him campfire stories, for example about the 
atheist gaucho who disproved Paradise, when his mother died, by calling 
upon her spirit to return, every night for seven nights. On the eighth night 
he announced that she had obviously not heard him, or she would certainly 
have come to console her beloved son; therefore, death must be the end. 
She snared him in descriptiSns of the days when the Peron people came in 
their white suits and slicked down hair and the peons chased them off, she 
told him how the railroads were built by the Anglos to service their estancias, 
and the dams, too, the story, for example, of her friend Claudette, "a real 
heartbreaker, my dear, married an engineer chap name of Granger, 
disappointed half the Hurlingham. Off they went to some dam he was 
building, and next thing they heard, the rebels were coming to blow it up. 
Granger went with the men to guard the dam, leaving Claudette alone with 
the maid, and wouldn't you know, a few hours later, the maid came running, 
sehora, ees one hombre at the door, ees as beeg as a house. What else? A 
rebel captain. -- "And your spouse, madame?" -- "Waiting for you at the 
dam, as he should be." -- "Then since he has not seen fit to protect you, the 
revolution will." And he left guards outside the house, my dear, quite a thing. 
But in the fighting both men were killed, husband and captain and Claudette 
insisted on a joint funeral, watched the two coffins going side by side into 
the ground, mourned for them both. After that we knew she was a 
dangerous lot, _trop fatale_, eh? What? _Trop_ jolly _fatale_." In the tall 
story of the beautiful Clau-- dette, Gibreel heard the music of Rosa's own 
longings. At such moments he would catch sight of her looking at him from 
the corners of her eyes, and he would feel a tugging in the region of his 
navel, as if something were trying to come out. Then she looked away, and 
the sensation faded. Perhaps it was only a sideeffect of stress. 
He asked her one night if she had seen the horns growing on Chamcha's 
head, but she went deaf and, instead of answering, told him how she would 
sit on a camp stool by the galpon or bull-pen at Los Alamos and the prize 



bulls would come up and lay their horned heads in her lap. One afternoon a 
girl named Aurora del Sol, who was the fiancee of Martin de la Cruz, let fall a 
saucy remark: I thought they only did that in the laps of virgins, she stage- 
whispered to her giggling friends, and Rosa turned to her sweetly and 
replied, Then perhaps, my dear, you would like to try? From that time 
Aurora del Sol, the best dancer at the estancia and the most desirable oi all 
the peon women, became the deadly enemy of the too-tall, too-bony woman 
from over the sea. 

"You look just like him," Rosa Diamond said as they stood at her night-time 
window, side by side, looking out to sea. "His double. Martin de la Cruz." At 
the mention of the cowboy's name Gibreel felt so violent a pain in his navel, 
a pulling pain, as if somebody had stuck a hook in his stomach, that a cry 
escaped his lips. Rosa Diamond appeared not to hear. "Look," she cried 
happily, "over there." 

Running along the midnight beach in the direction of the Martello tower and 
the holiday camp, -- running along the water's edge so that the incoming 
tide washed away its footprints, -- swerving and feinting, running for its life, 
there came a fullgrown, large--as— life ostrich. Down the beach it fled, and 
Gibreel's eyes followed it in wonder, until he could no longer make it out in 
the dark. 

ooo 

The next thing that happened took place in the village. They had gone into 
town to collect a cake and a bottle of champagne, because Rosa had 
remembered that it was her eighty-ninth birthday. Her family had been 
expelled from her life, so there had been no cards or telephone calls. Gibreel 
insisted that they should hold some sort of celebration, and showed her the 
secret inside his shirt, a fat money-belt full of pounds sterling acquired on 
the black market before leaving Bombay. "Also credit cards galore," he said. 
"I am no indigent fellow. Come, let us go. My treat." He was now so deeply 
in thrall to Rosa's narrative sorcery that he hardly remembered from day to 
day that he had a life to go to, a woman to surprise by the simple fact of his 
being alive, or any such thing. Trailing behind her meekly, he carried Mrs. 
Diamond's shopping-bags. 

He was loafing around on a Street corner while Rosa chatted to the baker 
when he felt, once again, that dragging hook in his stomach, and he fell 
against a lamp— post and gasped for air. He heard a clip-clopping hoise, and 
then around the corner came an archaic pony-trap, full of young people in 
what seemed at first sight to be fancy dress: the men in tight black trousers 
studded at the calf with silver buttons, their white shirts open almost to the 
waist; the women in wide skirts of frills and layers and bright colours, scarlet, 
emerald, gold. They were Singing in a foreign language and their gaiety 
made the street look dim and tawdry, but Gibreel realized that something 
weird was afoot, because nobody else in the street took the slightest notice 
of the ponytrap. Then Rosa emerged from the baker's with the cake-box 



dangling by its ribbon from the index finger of her left hand, and exclaimed: 
"Oh, there they are, arriving for the dance. We always had dances, you 
know, they like it, it's in their blood." And, after a pause: "That was the 
dance at which he killed the vulture." 

That was the dance at which a certain Juan Julia, nicknamed The Vulture on 
account of his cadaverous appearance, drank too much and insulted the 
honour of Aurora del Sol, and didn't stop until Martin had no option but to 
fight, _hey Martin, why you enjoy fi4cking with this one, I thought she was 

pretty dull . "Let us go away from the dancing," Martin said, and in the 

darkness, silhouetted against the fairy-lights hung from the trees around the 
dance-floor, the two men wrapped ponchas around their forearms, drew 
their knives, circled, fought. Juan died. Martin de la Cruz picked up the dead 
man's hat and threw it at the feet of Aurora del Sol. She picked up the hat 
and watched him walk away. 

Rosa Diamond at eighty-nine in a long silver sheath dress with a cigarette 
holder in one gloved hand and a silver turban on her head drank gin-and-sin 
from a green glass triangle and told stories of the good old days. "I want to 
dance," she announced suddenly. "It's my birthday and I haven't danced 
once." 

ooo 

The exertions of that night on which Rosa and Gibreel danced until dawn 
proved too much for the old lady, who collapsed into bed the next day with a 
low fever that induced ever more delirious apparitions: Gibreel saw Martin 
de la Cruz and Aurora del Sol dancing flamenco on the tiled and gabled roof 
of the Diamond house, and Peronistas in white suits stood on the boathouse 
to address a gathering of peons about the future: "Under Peron these lands 
will be expropriated and distributed among the people. The British railroads 
also will become the property of the state. Let's chuck them out, these 
brigands, these privateers ..." The plaster bust of Henry Diamond hung in 
mid-air, observing the scene, and a white—suited agitator pointed a finger at 
him and cried, That's him, your oppressor; there is the enemy. Gibreel's 
stomach ached so badly that he feared for his life, but at the very moment 
that his rational mind was considering the possibility of an ulcer or 
appendicitis, the rest of his brain whispered the truth, which was that he was 
being held prisoner and manipulated by the force of Rosa's will, just as the 
Angel Gibreel had been obliged to speak by the overwhelming need of the 
Prophet, Mahound. 

"She's dying," he realized. "Not long to go, either." Tossing in her bed in the 
fever's grip Rosa Diamond muttered about ombu poison and the enmity of 
her neighbour Doctor Babington, who asked Henry, is your wife perhaps 
quiet enough for the pastoral life, and who gave her (as a present for 
recovering from typhus) a copy of Amerigo Vespucci's account of his 
voyages. "The man was a notorious fantasist, of course," Babington smiled, 
"but fantasy can be stronger than fact; after all, he had continents named 



after him." As she grew weaker she poured more and more of her remaining 
strength into her own dream of Argentina, and Gibreel's navel felt as if it had 
been set on fire. He lay slumped in an armchair at her bedside and the 
apparitions multiplied by the hour. Woodwind music filled the air, and, most 
wonderful of all, a small white island appeared just off the shore, bobbing on 
the waves like a raft; it was white as snow, with white sand sloping up to a 
clump of albino trees, which were white, chalk—white, paper—white, to the 
very tips of their leaves. 

After the arrival of the white island Gibreel was overcome by a deep lethargy. 
Slumped in an armchair in the bedroom of the dying woman, his eyelids 
drooping, he felt the weight of his body increase until all movement became 
impossible. Then he was in another bedroom, in tight black trousers, with 
silver buttons along the calves and a heavy silver buckle at the waist. _You 
sent for me, Don Enrique_, he was saying to the soft, heavy man with a face 
like a white plaster bust, but he knew who had asked for him, and he never 
took his eyes from her face, even when he saw the colour rising from the 
white frill around her neck. 

Henry Diamond had refused to permit the authorities to become involved in 
the matter of Martin de la Cruz, _these people are my responsibility_, he 
told Rosa, _it is a question of honour_. Instead he had gone to some lengths 
to demonstrate his continuing trust in the killer, de la Cruz, for example by 
making him the captain of the estancia polo team. But Don Enrique was 
never really the same once Martin had killed the Vulture. He was more and 
more easily exhausted, and became listless, uninterested even in birds. 
Things began to come apart at Los Alamos, imperceptibly at first, then more 
obviously. The men in the white suits returned and were not chased away. 
When Rosa Diamond contracted typhus, there were many at the estancia 
who took it for an allegory of the old estate's decline. 

_What am I doing here_, Gibreel thought in great alarm, as he stood before 
Don Enrique in the rancher's study, while Doha Rosa blushed in the 
background, _this is someone else's place_. -- Great confidence in you, 
Henry was saying, not in English but Gibreel could still understand. -- My 
wife is to undertake a motor tour, for her convalescence, and you will 
accompany . . . Responsibilities at Los Alamos prevent me from going along. 
_Now I must speak, what to say_, but when his mouth opened the alien 
words emerged, it will be my honour, Don Enrique, click of heels, swivel, exit. 
Rosa Diamond in her eighty-nine-year-old weakness had begun to dream 
her story of stories, which she had guarded for more than half a century, 
and Gibreel was on a horse behind her Hispano-Suiza, driving from estancia 
to estancia, through a wood of arayana trees, beneath the high cordillera, 
arriving at grotesque homesteads built in the style of Scottish castles or 
Indian palaces, visiting the land of Mr. Cadwallader Evans, he of the seven 
wives who were happy enough to have only one night of duty each per week, 
and the territory of the notorious MacSween who had become enamoured of 



the ideas arriving in Argentina from Germany, and had started flying, from 
his estancia's flagpole, a red flag at whose heart a crooked black cross 
danced in a white circle. It was on the MacSween estancia that they came 
across the lagoon, and Rosa saw for the first time the white island of her 
fate, and insisted on rowing out for a picnic luncheon, accompanied neither 
by maid nor by chauffeur, taking only Martin de la Cruz to row the boat and 
to spread a scarlet cloth upon the white sand and to serve her with meat 
and wine. 

_As white as snow and as red as blood and as black as ebony_. As she 
reclined in black skirt and white blouse, lying upon scarlet which itself lay 
over white, while he (also wearing black and white) poured red wine into the 
glass in her white-gloved hand, -- and then, to his own astonishment, 
_bloody goddamn_, as he caught at her hand and began to kiss, -- 
something happened, the scene grew blurred, one minute they were lying on 
the scarlet cloth, rolling all over it so that cheeses and cold cuts and salads 
and pates were crushed beneath the weight of their desire, and when they 
returned to the Hispano-Suiza it was impossible to conceal anything from 
chauffeur or maid on account of the foodstains all over their clothes, -- while 
the next minute she was recoiling from him, not cruelly but in sadness, 
drawing her hand away and making a tiny gesture of the head, no, and he 
stood, bowed, retreated, leaving her with virtue and lunch intact, -- the two 
possibilities kept alternating, while dying Rosa tossed on her bed, did-she- 
didn't-she, making the last version of the story of her life, unable to decide 
what she wanted to be true. 

ooo 

"I'm going crazy," Gibreel thought. "She's dying, but I'm losing my mind." 
The moon was out, and Rosa's breathing was the only sound in the room: 
snoring as she breathed in and exhaling heavily, with small grunting noises. 
Gibreel tried to rise from his chair, and found he could not. Even in these 
intervals between the visions his body remained impossibly heavy. As if a 
boulder had been placed upon his chest. And the images, when they came, 
continued to be confused, so that at one moment he was in a hayloft at Los 
Alamos, making love to her while she murmured his name, over and over, 
_Martin of the Cross_, -- and the next moment she was ignoring him in 
broad daylight beneath the watching eyes of a certain Aurora del Sol, -- so 
that it was not possible to distinguish memory from wishes, or guilty 
reconstructions from confessional truths, -- because even on her deathbed 
Rosa Diamond did not know how to look her history in the eye. 
Moonlight streamed into the room. As it struck Rosa's face it appeared to 
pass right through her, and indeed Gibreel was beginning to be able to make 
out the pattern of the lace embroidery on her pillowcase. Then he saw Don 
Enrique and his friend, the puritanical and disapproving Dr. Babington, 
standing on the balcony, as solid as you could wish. It occurred to him that 
as the apparitions increased in clarity Rosa grew fainter and fainter, fading 



away, exchanging places, one might say, with the ghosts. And because he 
had also understood that the manifestations depended on him, his stomach- 
-ache, his stone--like weightiness, he began to fear for his own life as well. 
"You wanted me to falsify Juan Julia's death certificate," Dr. Babington was 
saying. "I did so out of our old friendship. But it was wrong to do so; and I 
see the result before me. You have sheltered a killer and it is, perhaps, your 
conscience that is eating you away. Go home, Enrique. Go home, and take 
that wife of yours, before something worse happens." 

"I am home," Henry Diamond said. "And I take exception to your mention of 
my wife." 

"Wherever the English settle, they never leave England," Dr. Babington said 
as he faded into the moonlight. "Unless, like Doha Rosa, they fall in love." 
A cloud passed across the moonlight, and now that the balcony was empty 
Gibreel Farishta finally managed to force himself out of the chair and on to 
his feet. Walking was like dragging a ball and chain across the floor, but he 
reached the window. In every direction, and as far as he could see, there 
were giant thistles waving in the breeze. Where the sea had been there was 
now an ocean of thistles, extending as far as the horizon, thistles as high as 
a full-grown man. He heard the disembodied voice of Dr. Babington mutter 
in his ear: "The first plague of thistles for fifty years. The past, it seems, 
returns." He saw a woman running through the thick, rippling growth, 
barefoot, with loose dark hair. "She did it," Rosa's voice said clearly behind 
him. "After betraying him with the Vulture and making him into a murderer. 
He wouldn't look at her after that. Oh, she did it all right. Very dangerous 
one, that one. Very." Gibreel lost sight of Aurora del Sol in the thistles; one 
mirage obscured another. 

He felt something grab him from behind, spin him around and fling him flat 
on his back. There was nobody to be seen, but Rosa Diamond was sitting 
bolt upright in bed, staring at him wide-eyed, making him understand that 
she had given up hope of clinging on to life, and needed him to help her 
complete the last revelation. As with the businessman of his dreams, he felt 
helpless, ignorant . . . she seemed to know, however, how to draw the 
images from him. Linking the two of them, navel to navel, he saw a shining 
cord. 

Now he was by a pond in the infinity of the thistles, allowing his horse to 
drink, and she came riding up on her mare. Now he was embracing her, 
loosening her garments and her hair, and now they were making love. Now 
she was whispering, how can you like me, I am so much older than you, and 
he spoke comforting words. 

Now she rose, dressed, rode away, while he remained there, his body 
languid and warm, failing to notice the moment when a woman's hand stole 
out of the thistles and took hold of his silver—hafted knife. . . 
No! No! No, this way! Now she rode up to him by the pond, and the moment 
she dismounted, looking nervously at him, he fell upon her, he told her he 



couldn't bear her rejections any longer, they fell to the ground together, she 
screamed, he tore at her clothes, and her hands, clawing at his body, came 
upon the handle of a knife... 
No! No, never, no! This way: here! 

Now the two of them were making love, tenderly, with many slow caresses; 
and now a third rider entered the clearing by the pool, and the lovers rushed 
apart; now Don Enrique drew his small pistol and aimed at his rival's heart, - 

-- and he felt Aurora stabbing him in the heart, over and over, this is for 
Juan, and this is for abandoning me, and this is for your grand English whore, 
--. -- and he felt his victim's knife entering his heart, as Rosa stabbed him, 
once, twice, and again, — . 

-- and after Henry's bullet had killed him the Englishman took the dead 
man's knife and stabbed him, many times, in the bleeding wound. 
Gibreel, screaming loudly, lost consciousness at this point. 
When he regained his senses the old woman in the bed was speaking to 
herself, so softly that he could barely make out the words. "The pampero 
came, the south-west wind, flattening the thistles. That's when they found 
him, or was it before." The last of the story. How Aurora del Sol spat in Rosa 
Diamond's face at the funeral of Martin de la Cruz. How it was arranged that 
nobody was to be charged for the murder, on condition that Don Enrique 
took Doha Rosa and returned to England with all speed. How they boarded 
the train at the Los Alamos station and the men in white suits stood on the 
platform, wearing borsalino hats, making sure they really left. How, once the 
train had started moving, Rosa Diamond opened the holdall on the seat 
beside her, and said defiantly, _I brought something. A little souvenir_. And 
unwrapped a cloth bundle to reveal a gaucho's silver-hafted knife. 
"Henry died the first winter home. Then nothing happened. The war. The 
end." She paused. "To diminish into this, after being in that vastness. It isn't 
to be borne." And, after a further silence: "Everything shrinks." 
There was a change in the moonlight, and Gibreel felt a weight lifting from 
him, so rapidly that he thought he might float up towards the ceiling. Rosa 
Diamond lay still, eyes closed, her arms resting on the patchwork 
counterpane. She looked: _normal_. Gibreel realized that there was nothing 
to prevent him from walking out of the door. 

He made his way downstairs carefully, his legs still a little unsteady; found 
the heavy gabardine overcoat that had once belonged to Henry Diamond, 
and the grey felt trilby inside which Don Enrique's name had been sewn by 
his wife's own hand; and left, without looking back. The moment he got 
outside a wind snatched his hat and sent it skipping down the beach. He 
chased it, caught it, jammed it back on. _London shareef, here I come_. He 
had the city in his pocket: Geographers' London, the whole dog-eared 
metropolis, A to Z. 



"What to do?" he was thinking. "Phone or not phone? No, just turn up, ring 
the bell and say, baby, your wish came true, from sea bed to your bed, 
takes more than a plane crash to keep me away from you. -- Okay, maybe 
not quite, but words to that effect. -- Yes. Surprise is the best policy. Allie 
Bibi, boo to you." 

Then he heard the singing. It was coming from the old boathouse with the 
one-eyed pirate painted on the outside, and the song was foreign, but 
familiar: a song that Rosa Diamond had often hummed, and the voice, too, 
was familiar, although a little different, less quavery; _younger_. The 
boathouse door was unaccountably unlocked, and banging in the wind. He 
went towards the song. 

"Take your coat off," she said. She was dressed as she had been on the day 
of the white island: black skirt and boots, white silk blouse, hatless. He 
spread the coat on the boathouse floor, its bright scarlet lining glowing in 
the confined, moonlit space. She lay down amid the random clutter of an 
English life, cricket stumps, a yellowed lampshade, chipped vases, a folding 
table, trunks; and extended an arm towards him. He lay down by her side. 
"How can you like me?" she murmured. "I am so much older than you." 

3 

When they pulled his pyjamas down in the windowless police van and he saw 
the thick, tightly curled dark hair covering his thighs, Saladin Chamcha 
broke down for the second time that night; this time, however, he began to 
giggle hysterically, infected, perhaps, by the continuing hilarity of his captors. 
The three immigration officers were in particularly high spirits, and it was 
one of these -- the popeyed fellow whose name, it transpired, was Stein -- 
who had "de-- bagged" Saladin with a merry cry of, "Opening time, Packy; 
let's see what you're made of!" Red-and-white stripes were dragged off the 
protesting Chamcha, who was reclining on the floor of the van with two stout 
policemen holding each arm and a fifth constable's boot placed firmly upon 
his chest, and whose protests went unheard in the general mirthful din. His 
horns kept banging against things, the wheel— arch, the uncarpeted floor or 
a policeman's shin -- on these last occasions he was soundly buffeted about 
the face by the understandably irate law—enforcement officer -- and he was, 
in sum, in as miserably low spirits as he could recall. Nevertheless, when he 
saw what lay beneath his borrowed pyjamas, he could not prevent that 
disbelieving giggle from escaping past his teeth. 

His thighs had grown uncommonly wide and powerful, as well as hairy. 
Below the knee the hairiness came to a halt, and his legs narrowed into 
tough, bony, almost fleshless calves, terminating in a pair of shiny, cloven 
hoofs, such as one might find on any billy-goat. Saladin was also taken 
aback by the sight of his phallus, greatly enlarged and embarrassingly erect, 
an organ that he had the greatest difficulty in acknowledging as his own. 
"What's this, then?" joked Novak -- the former "Hisser" — giving it a playful 



tweak. "Fancy one of us, maybe?" Whereupon the "moaning" immigration 
officer, Joe Bruno, slapped his thigh, dug Novak in the ribs, and shouted, 
"Nah, that ain't it. Seems like we really got his goat." "I get it," Novak 
shouted back, as his fist accidentally punched Saladin in his newly enlarged 
testicles. "Hey! Hey!" howled Stein, with tears in his eyes. "Listen, here's an 
even better ... no wonder he's so fucking _horny_." 
At which the three of them, repeating many times "Got his goat. . . 
horny.. ." fell into one another's arms and howled with delight. Chamcha 
wanted to speak, but was afraid that he would find his voice mutated into 
goat--bleats, and, besides, the policeman's boot had begun to press harder 
than ever on his chest, and it was hard to form any words. What puzzled 
Chamcha was that a circumstance which struck him as utterly bewildering 
and unprecedented -- that is, his metamorphosis into this supernatural imp - 
- was being treated by the others as if it were the most banal and familiar 
matter they could imagine. "This isn't England," he thought, not for the first 
or last time. How could it be, after all; where in all that moderate and 
common--sensical land was there room for such a police van in whose 
interior such events as these might plausibly transpire? He was being forced 
towards the conclusion that he had indeed died in the exploding aeroplane 
and that everything that followed had been some sort of after-life. If that 
were the case, his long—standing rejection of the Eternal was beginning to 
look pretty foolish. -- But where, in all this, was any sign of a Supreme 
Being, whether benevolent or malign? Why did Purgatory, or Hell, or 
whatever this place might be, look so much like that Sussex of rewards and 
fairies which every schoolboy knew? -- Perhaps, it occurred to him, he had 
not actually perished in the _Bostan_ disaster, but was lying gravely ill in 
some hospital ward, plagued by delirious dreams? This explanation appealed 
to him, not least because it unmade the meaning of a certain late-night 
telephone call, and a man's voice that he was trying, unsuccessfully, to 
forget ... He felt a sharp kick land on his ribs, painful and realistic enough 
to make him doubt the truth of all such hallucination-theories. He returned 
his attention to the actual, to this present comprising a sealed police van 
containing three immigration officers and five policemen that was, for the 
moment at any rate, all the universe he possessed. It was a universe of fear. 
Novak and the rest had snapped out of their happy mood. "Animal," Stein 
cursed him as he administered a series of kicks, and Bruno joined in: "You're 
all the same. Can't expect animals to observe civilized standards. Eh?" And 
Novak took up the thread: "We're talking about fucking personal hygiene 
here, you little fuck." 

Chamcha was mystified. Then he noticed that a large number of soft, pellety 
objects had appeared on the floor of the Black Maria. He felt consumed by 
bitterness and shame. It seemed that even his natural processes were 
goatish now. The humiliation of it! He was -- had gone to some lengths to 
become — a sophisticated man! Such degradations might be all very well for 



riff-raff from villages in Sylhet or the bicycle-repair shops of Gujranwala, but 
he was cut from different cloth! "My good fellows," he began, attempting a 
tone of authority that was pretty difficult to bring off from that undignified 
position on his back with his hoofy legs wide apart and a soft tumble of his 
own excrement all about him, "my good fellows, you had best understand 
your mistake before it's too late." 

Novak cupped a hand behind an ear. "What's that? What was that noise?" he 
inquired, looking about him, and Stein said, "Search me." "Tell you what it 
sounded like," Joe Bruno volunteered, and with his hands around his mouth 
he bellowed: "Maaaa-aa!" Then the three of them all laughed once more, so 
that Saladin had no way of telling if they were simply insulting him or if his 
vocal cords had truly been infected, as he feared, by this macabre 
demoniasis that had overcome him without the slightest warning. He had 
begun to shiver again. The night was extremely cold. 
The officer, Stein, who appeared to be the leader of the trinity, or at least 
the primus inter pares, returned abruptly to the subject of the pellety refuse 
rolling around the floor of the moving van. "In this country," he informed 
Saladin, "we clean up our messes." 

The policemen stopped holding him down and pulled him into a kneeling 
position. "That's right," said Novak, "clean it up." Joe Bruno placed a large 
hand behind Chamcha's neck and pushed his head down towards the pellet- 
littered floor. "Off you go," he said, in a conversational voice. "Sooner you 
start, sooner you'll polish it off." 
ooo 

Even as he was performing (having no option) the latest and basest ritual of 
his unwarranted humiliation, -- or, to put it another way, as the 
circumstances of his miraculously spared life grew ever more infernal and 
outre -- Saladin Chamcha began to notice that the three immigration officers 
no longer looked or acted nearly as strangely as at first. For one thing, they 
no longer resembled one another in the slightest. Officer Stein, whom his 
colleagues called "Mack" or "Jockey", turned out to be a large, burly man 
with a thick roller-coaster of a nose; his accent, it now transpired, was 
exaggeratedly Scottish. "Tha's the ticket," he remarked approvingly as 
Chamcha munched miserably on. "An actor, was it? I'm partial to watchin" a 
guid man perform." 

This observation prompted Officer Novak -- that is, "Kim" -- who had 
acquired an alarmingly pallid colouring, an ascetically bony face that 
reminded one of medieval icons, and a frown suggesting some deep inner 
torment, to burst into a short peroration about his favourite television soap- 
opera stars and gameshow hosts, while Officer Bruno, who struck Chamcha 
as having grown exceedingly handsome all of a sudden, his hair shiny with 
styling gel and centrally divided, his blond beard contrasting dramatically 
with the darker hair on his head, -- Bruno, the youngest of the three, asked 
lasciviously, what about watchin" girls, then, that's my game. This new 



notion set the three of them off into all manner of half-completed anecdotes 
pregnant with suggestions of a certain type, but when the five policemen 
attempted to join in they joined ranks, grew stern, and put the constables in 
their places. "Little children," Mr. Stein admonished them, "should be seen 
an" no hearrud." 

By this time Chamcha was gagging violently on his meal, forcing himself not 
to vomit, knowing that such an error would only prolong his misery. 
He was crawling about on the floor of the van, seeking out the pellets of his 
torture as they rolled from side to side, and the policemen, needing an outlet 
for the frustration engendered by the immigration officer's rebuke, began to 
abuse Saladin roundly and pull the hair on his rump to increase both his 
discomfort and his discomfiture. Then the five policemen defiantly started up 
their own version of the immigration officers' conversation, and set to 
analysing the merits of divers movie stars, darts players, professional 
wrestlers and the like; but because they had been put into a bad humour by 
the loftiness of "Jockey" Stein, they were unable to maintain the abstract 
and intellectual tone of their superiors, and fell to quarrelling over the 
relative merits of the Tottenham Hotspur "double" team of the early 1960s 
and the mighty Liverpool side of the present day, -- in which the Liverpool 
supporters incensed the Spurs fans by alleging that the great Danny 
Blanchflower was a "luxury" player, a cream puff, fldwer by name, pansy by 
nature; -- whereupon the offended claque responded by shouting that in the 
case of Liverpool it was the supporters who were the bum-boys, the Spurs 
mob could take them apart with their arms tied behind their backs. Of 
course all the constables were familiar with the techniques of football 
hooligans, having spent many Saturdays with their backs to the game 
watching the spectators in the various stadiums up and down the country, 
and as their argument grew heated they reached the point of wishing to 
demonstrate, to their opposing colleagues, exactly what they meant by 
"tearing apart", "bollocking", "bottling" and the like. The angry factions 
glared at one another and then, all together, they turned to gaze upon the 
person of Saladin Chamcha. 

Well, the ruckus in that police van grew noisier and noisier, -- and it's true to 
say that Chamcha was partly to blame, because he had started squealing 
like a pig, -- and the young bobbies were thumping and gouging various 
parts of his anatomy, using him both as a guinea-pig and a safety-valve, 
remaining careful, in spite of their excitation, to confine their blows to his 
softer, more fleshy parts, to minimize the risk of breakages and bruises; and 
when Jockey, Kim and Joey saw what their juniors were getting up to, they 
chose to be tolerant, because boys would have their fun. 
Besides, all this talk of watching had brought Stein, Bruno and Novak round 
to an examination of weightier matters, and now, with solemn faces and 
judicious voices, they were speaking of the need, in this day and age, for an 
increase in observation, not merely in the sense of "spectating", but in that 



of "watchfulness", and "surveillance". The young constables' experience was 
extremely relevant, Stein intoned: watch the crowd, not the game. "Eternal 
vigilance is the price o" liberty," he proclaimed. 

"Eek," cried Chamcha, unable to avoid interrupting. "Aargh, unnhh, owoo." 
ooo 

After a time a curious mood of detachment fell upon Saladin. He no longer 
had any idea of how long they had been travelling in the Black Maria of his 
hard fall from grace, nor could he have hazarded a guess as to the proximity 
of their ultimate destination, even though the tinnitus in his ears was 
growing gradually louder, those phantasmal grandmother's footsteps, 
ellowen, deeowen, London. The blows raining down on him now felt as soft 
as a lover's caresses; the grotesque sight of his own metamorphosed body 
no longer appalled him; even the last pellets of goatexcrement failed to stir 
his much— abused stomach. Numbly, he crouched down in his little world, 
trying to make himself smaller and smaller, in the hope that he might 
eventually disappear altogether, and so regain his freedom. 
The talk of surveillance techniques had reunited immigration officers and 
policemen, healing the breach caused by Jockey Stein's words of puritanical 
reproof. Chamcha, the insect on the floor of the van, heard, as if through a 
telephone scrambler, the faraway voices of his captors speaking eagerly of 
the need for more video equipment at public events and of the benefits of 
computerized information, and, in what appeared to be a complete 
contradiction, of the efficacy of placing too rich a mixture in the nosebags of 
police horses on the night before a big match, because when equine 
stomach—upsets led to the marchers being showered with shit it always 
provoked them into violence, _an" then we can really get amongst them, 
can't we just_. Unable to find a way of making this universe of soap operas, 
matchoftheday, cloaks and daggers cohere into any recognizable whole, 
Chamcha closed his ears to the chatter and listened to the footsteps in his 
ears. 

Then the penny dropped. 
"Ask the Computer!" 

Three immigration officers and five policemen fell silent as the foul—smelling 
creature sat up and hollered at them. "What's he on about?" asked the 
youngest policeman — one of the Tottenham supporters, as it happened -- 
doubtfully. "Shall I fetch him another whack?" 
"My name is Salahuddin Chamchawala, professional name Saladin 
Chamcha," the demi-goat gibbered. "I am a member of Actors' Equity, the 
Automobile Association and the Garrick Club. My car registration number is 
suchandsuch. Ask the Computer. Please." 

"Who're you trying to kid?" inquired one of the Liverpool fans, but he, too, 
sounded uncertain. "Look at yourself. You're a fucking Packy billy. Sally-who? 
-- What kind of name is that for an Englishman?" 



Chamcha found a scrap of anger from somewhere. "And what about them?" 
he demanded, jerking his head at the immigration officers. "They don't 
sound so Anglo-Saxon to me." 

For a moment it seemed that they might all fall upon him and tear him limb 
from limb for such temerity, but at length the skull-faced Officer Novak 
merely slapped his face a few times while replying, "I'm from Weybridge, 
you cunt. Get it straight: Weybridge, where the fucking _Beatles_ used to 
live." 

Stein said: "Better check him out." Three and a half minutes later the Black 
Maria came to a halt and three immigration officers, five constables and one 
police driver held a crisis conference -- _here's a pretty effing pickle_ -- and 
Chamcha noted that in their new mood all nine had begun to look alike, 
rendered equal and identical by their tension and fear. Nor was it long before 
he understood that the call to the Police National Computer, which had 
promptly identified him as a British Citizen first class, had not improved his 
situation, but had placed him, if anything, in greater danger than before. 
— We could say, -- one of the nine suggested, — that he was lying 
unconscious on the beach. -- Won't work, -- came the reply, on account of 
the old lady and the other geezer. -- Then he resisted arrest and turned 
nasty and in the ensuing altercation he kind of fainted. -- Or the old bag was 
ga-ga, made no sense to any of us, and the other guy wossname never 
spoke up, and as for this bugger, you only have to clock the bleeder, looks 
like the very devil, what were we supposed to think? — And then he went 
and passed out on us, so what could we do, in all fairness, I ask you, your 
honour, but bring him in to the medical facility at the Detention Centre, for 
proper care followed by observation and questioning, using our reason-to- 
believe guidelines; what do you reckon on something of that nature? -- It's 
nine against one, but the old biddy and the second bloke make it a bit of a 
bastard. -- Look, we can fix the tale later, first thing like I keep saying is to 
get him unconscious. — Right. 

ooo 

Chamcha woke up in a hospital bed with green slime coming up from his 
lungs. His bones felt as if somebody had put them in the icebox for a long 
while. He began to cough, and when the fit ended nineteen and a half 
minutes later he fell back into a shallow, sickly sleep without having taken in 
any aspect of his present whereabouts. When he surfaced again a friendly 
woman's face was looking down at him, smiling reassuringly. "You goin to be 
fine," she said, patting him on the shoulder. "A lickle pneumonia is all you 
got." She introduced herself as his physiotherapist, Hyacinth Phillips. And 
added, "I never judge a person by appearances. No, sir. Don't you go 
thinking I do." 

With that, she rolled him over on to his side, placed a small cardboard box 
by his lips, hitched up her white housecoat, kicked off her shoes, and leaped 
athletically on to the bed to sit astride him, for all the world as if he were a 



horse that she meant to ride right through the screens surrounding his bed 
and out into goodness knew what manner of transmogrified landscape. 
"Doctor's orders," she explained. "Thirty— minute sessions, twice a day." 
Without further preamble, she began pummelling him briskly about the 
middle body, with fightly clenched, but evidently expert, fists. 
For poor Saladin, fresh from his beating in the police van, this new assault 
was the last straw. He began to struggle beneath her pounding fists, crying 
loudly, "Let me out of here; has anybody informed my wife?" The effort of 
shouting out induced a second coughing spasm that lasted seventeen and 
three—quarter minutes and earned him a telling off from the physiotherapist, 
Hyacinth. "You wastin my time," she said. "I should be done with your right 
lung by now and instead I hardly get started. You go behave or not?" She 
had remained on the bed, straddling him, bouncing up and down as his body 
convulsed, like a rodeo rider hanging on for the nine-second bell. He 
subsided in defeat, and allowed her to beat the green fluid out of his 
inflamed lungs. When she finished he was obliged to admit that he felt a 
good deal better. She removed the little box which was now half-full of slime 
and said cheerily, "You be standin up firm in no time," and then, colouring in 
confusion, apologized, "Excuse _me_," and fled without remembering to pull 
back the encircling screens. 

"Time to take stock of the situation," he told himself. A quick physical 
examination informed him that his new, mutant condition had remained 
unchanged. This cast his spirits down, and he realized that he had been half- 
hoping that the nightmare would have ended while he slept. He was dressed 
in a new pair of alien pyjamas, this time of an undifferentiated pale green 
colour, which matched both the fabric of the screens and what he could see 
of the walls and ceiling of that cryptic and anonymous ward. His legs still 
ended in those distressing hoofs, and the horns on his head were as sharp 
as before ... he was distracted from this morose inventory by a man's voice 
from nearby, crying out in heart-rending distress: "Oh, if ever a body 
suffered . . . !" 

"What on earth?" Chamcha thought, and determined to investigate. But now 
he was becoming aware of many other sounds, as unsettling as the first. It 
seemed to him that he could hear all sorts of animal noises: the snorting of 
bulls, the chattering of monkeys, even the pretty— polly mimic-squawks of 
parrots or talking budgerigars. Then, from another direction, he heard a 
woman grunting and shrieking, at what sounded like the end of a painful 
labour; followed by the yowling of a new-born baby. However, the woman's 
cries did not subside when the baby's began; if anything, they redoubled in 
their intensity, and perhaps fifteen minutes later Chamcha distinctly heard a 
second infant's voice joining the first. Still the woman's birth-agony refused 
to end, and at intervals ranging from fifteen to thirty minutes for what 
seemed like an endless time she continued to add new babies to the already 
improbable numbers marching, like conquering armies, from her womb. 



His nose informed him that the sanatorium, or whatever the place called 
itself, was also beginning to stink to the heavens; jungle and farmyard 
odours mingled with a rich aroma similar to that of exotic spices sizzling in 
clarified butter -- coriander, turmeric, cinnamon, cardamoms, cloves. "This is 
too much," he thought firmly. "Time to get a few things sorted out." He 
swung his legs out of bed, tried to stand up, and promptly fell to the floor, 
being utterly unaccustomed to his new legs. It took him around an hour to 
overcome this problem -- learning to walk by holding on to the bed and 
stumbling around it until his confidence grew. At length, and not a little 
unsteadily, he made his way to the nearest screen; whereupon the face of 
the immigration officer Stein appeared, Cheshire-Cat--like, between two of 
the screens to his left, followed rapidly by the rest of the fellow, who drew 
the screens together behind him with suspicious rapidity. 
"Doing all right?" Stein asked, his smile remaining wide. 
"When can I see the doctor? When can I go to the toilet? When can I leave?" 
Chamcha asked in a rush. Stein answered equably: the doctor would be 
round presently; Nurse Phillips would bring him a bedpan; he could leave as 
soon as he was well. "Damn decent of you to come down with the lung 
thing," Stein added, with the gratitude of an author whose character had 
unexpectedly solved a ticklish technical problem. "Makes the story much 
more convincing. Seems you were that sick, you did pass out on us after all. 
Nine of us remember it well. Thanks." Chamcha could not find any words. 
"And another thing," Stein went on. "The old burd, Mrs. Diamond. Turns out 
to be dead in her bed, cold as mutton, and the other gentleman vanished 
clear away. The possibility of foul play has no as yet been eliminated." 
"In conclusion," he said before disappearing forever from Saladin's new life, 
"I suggest, Mr. Citizen Saladin, that you dinna trouble with a complaint. 
You'll forgive me for speaking plain, but with your wee horns and your great 
hoofs you wouldna look the most reliable of witnesses. Good day to you 
now." 

Saladin Chamcha closed his eyes and when he opened them his tormentor 
had turned into the nurse and physiotherapist, Hyacinth Phillips. "Why you 
wan go walking?" she asked. "Whatever your heart desires, you jus ask me, 
Hyacinth, and we'll see what we can fix." 

ooo 



"Ssst." 

That night, in the greeny light of the mysterious institution, Saladin was 
awakened by a hiss out of an Indian bazaar. 
"Ssst. You, Beelzebub. Wake up." 

Standing in front of him was a figure so impossible that Chamcha wanted to 
bury his head under the sheets; yet could not, for was not he himself. . . ? 
"That's right," the creature said. "You see, you're not alone." 
It had an entirely human body, but its head was that of a ferocious tiger, 
with three rows of teeth. "The night guards often doze off," it explained. 
"That's how we manage to get to talk." 

Just then a voice from one of the other beds -- each bed, as Chamcha now 
knew, was protected by its own ring of screens -- wailed loudly: "Oh, if ever 
a body suffered!" and the man-tiger, or manticore, as it called itself, gave an 
exasperated growl. "That Moaner Lisa," it exclaimed. "All they did to him 
was make him blind." 
"Who did what?" Chamcha was confused. 

"The point is," the manticore continued, "are you going to put up with it?" 
Saladin was still puzzled. The other seemed to be suggesting that these 
mutations were the responsibility of— of whom? How could they be? -- "I 
don't see," he ventured, "who can be blamed . . ." 

The manticore ground its three rows of teeth in evident frustration. "There's 
a woman over that way," it said, "who is now mostly water-buffalo. There 
are businessmen from Nigeria who have grown sturdy tails. There is a group 
of holidaymakers from Senegal who were doing no more than changing 
planes when they were turned into slippery snakes. I myself am in the rag 
trade; for some years now I have been a highly paid male model, based in 
Bombay, wearing a wide range of suitings and shirtings also. But who will 
employ me now?" he burst into sudden and unexpected tears. "There, 
there," said Saladin Chamcha, automatically. "Everything will be all right, 
I'm sure of it. Have courage." 

The creature composed itself. "The point is," it said fiercely, "some of us 
aren't going to stand for it. We're going to bust out of here before they turn 
us into anything worse. Every night I feel a different piece of me beginning 
to change. I've started, for example, to break wind continually ... I beg your 
pardon you see what I mean? By the way, try these," he slipped Chamcha a 
packet of extra-strength peppermints. "They'll help your breath. I've bribed 
one of the guards to bring in a supply." 
"But how do they do it?" Chamcha wanted to know. 

"They describe us," the other whispered solemnly. "That's all. They have the 
power of description, and we succumb to the pictures they construct." 
"It's hard to believe," Chamcha argued. "I've lived here for many years and 
it never happened before ..." His words dried up because he saw the 
manticore looking at him through narrow, distrustful eyes. "Many years?" it 



asked. "How could that be? -- Maybe you're an informer? -- Yes, that's it, a 
spy?" 

Just then a wail came from a far corner of the ward. "Lemme go," a woman's 
voice howled. "OJesus I want to go. Jesus Mary I gotta go, lemme go, O God, 
O Jesus God." A very lecherouslooking wolf put its head through Saladin's 
screens and spoke urgently to the manticore. "The guards'll be here soon," it 
hissed. "It's her again, Glass Bertha." 

"Glass . . .?" Saladin began. "Her skin turned to glass," the manticore 
explained impatiently, not knowing that he was bringing Chamcha's worst 
dream to life. "And the bastards smashed it up for her. Now she can't even 
walk to the toilet." 

A new voice hissed out across the greeny night. "For God's sake, woman. Go 
in the fucking bedpan." 

The wolf was pulling the manticore away. "Is he with us or not?" it wanted to 
know. The manticore shrugged. "He can't make up his mind," it answered. 
"Can't believe his own eyes, that's his trouble." 

They fled, hearing the approaching crunch of the guards' heavy boots. 

ooo 

The next day there was no sign of a doctor, or of Pamela, and Chamcha in 
his utter bewilderment woke and slept as if the two conditions no longer 
required to be thought of as opposites, but as states that flowed into and out 
of one another to create a kind of unending delirium of the senses.. . he 
found himself dreaming of the Queen, of making tender love to the Monarch. 
She was the body of Britain, the avatar of the State, and he had chosen her, 
joined with her; she was his Beloved, the moon of his delight. 
Hyacinth came at the appointed times to ride and pummel him, and he 
submitted without any fuss. But when she finished she whispered into his 
ear: "You in with the rest?" and he understood that she was involved in the 
great conspiracy, too. "If you are," he heard himself saying, "then you can 
count me in." She nodded, looking pleased. Chamcha felt a warmth filling 
him up, and he began to wonder about taking hold of one of the 
physiotherapist's exceedingly dainty, albeit powerful, little fists; but just 
then a shout came from the direction of the blind man: "My stick, I've lost 
my stick." 

"Poor old bugger," said Hyacinth, and hopping off Chamcha she darted 
across to the sightless fellow, picked up the fallen stick, restored it to its 
owner, and came back to Saladin. "Now," she said. "I'll see you this pm; 
okay, no problems?" 

He wanted her to stay, but she acted brisk. "I'm a busy woman, Mr. 
Chamcha. Things to do, people to see." 

When she had gone he lay back and smiled for the first time in a long while. 
It did not occur to him that his metamorphosis must be continuing, because 
he was actually entertaining romantic notions about a black woman; and 



before he had time to think such complex thoughts, the blind man next door 
began, once again, to speak. 

"I have noticed you," Chamcha heard him say, "I have noticed you, and 
come to appreciate your kindness and understanding." Saladin realized that 
he was making a formal speech of thanks to the empty space where he 
clearly believed the physiotherapist was still standing. "I am not a man who 
forgets a kindness. One day, perhaps, I may be able to repay it, but for the 
moment, please know that it is remembered, and fondly, too. . ." Chamcha 
did not have the courage to call out, _she isn't there, old man, she left some 
time back_. He listened unhappily until at length the blind man asked the 
thin air a question: "I hope, perhaps, you may also remember me? A little? 
On occasion?" Then came a silence; a dry laugh; the sound of a man sitting 
down, heavily, all of a sudden. And finally, after an unbearable pause, 
bathos: "Oh," the soliloquist bellowed, "oh, if ever a body suffered. . . !" 
We strive for the heights but our natures betray us, Chamcha thought; 
clowns in search of crowns. The bitterness overcame him. _Once I was 
lighter, happier, warm. Now the black water is in my veins_. 
Still no Pamela. _What the hell_. That night, he told the manticore and the 
wolf that he was with them, all the way. 

ooo 

The great escape took place some nights later, when Saladin's lungs had 
been all but emptied of slime by the ministrations of Miss Hyacinth Phillips. 
It turned out to be a well-organized affair on a pretty large scale, involving 
not only the inmates of the sanatorium but also the detenus, as the 
manticore called them, held behind wire fences in the Detention Centre 
nearby. Not being one of the grand strategists of the escape, Chamcha 
simply waited by his bed as instructed until Hyacinth brought him word, and 
then they ran out of that ward of nightmares into the clarity of a cold, 
moonlit sky, past several bound, gagged men: their former guards. There 
were many shadowy figures running through the glowing night, and 
Chamcha glimpsed beings he could never have imagined, men and women 
who were also partially plants, or giant insects, or even, on occasion, built 
partly of brick or stone; there were men with rhinoceros horns instead of 
noses and women with necks as long as any giraffe. The monsters ran 
quickly, silently, to the edge of the Detention Centre compound, where the 
manticore and other sharp-toothed mutants were waiting by the large holes 
they had bitten into the fabric of the containing fence, and then they were 
out, free, going their separate ways, without hope, but also without shame. 
Saladin Chamcha and Hyacinth Phillips ran side by side, his goat-hoofs clip- 
clopping on the hard pavements: _east_ she told him, as he heard his own 
footsteps replace the tinnitus in his ears, east east east they ran, taking the 
low roads to London town. 



4 

Jumpy Joshi had become Pamela Chamcha's lover by what she afterwards 
called "sheer chance" on the night she learned of her husband's death in the 
_Bostan_ explosion, so that the sound of his old college friend Saladin's 
voice speaking from beyond the grave in the middle of the night, uttering 
the five gnomic words _sorry, excuse please, wrong number_, -- speaking, 
moreover, less than two hours after Jumpy and Pamela had made, with the 
assistance of two bottles of whisky, the two-- backed beast, -- put him in a 
tight spot. "Who was _that?_" Pamela, still mostly asleep, with a blackout 
mask over her eyes, rolled over to inquire, and he decided to reply, "Just a 
breather, don't worry about it," which was all very well, except then he had 
to do the worrying all by himself, sitting up in bed, naked, and sucking, for 
comfort, as he had all his life, the thumb on his right hand. 
He was a small person with wire coathanger shoulders and an enormous 
capacity for nervous agitation, evidenced by his pale, sunken--eyed face; his 
thinning hair -- still entirely black and curly -- which had been ruffled so 
often by his frenzied hands that it no longer took the slightest notice of 
brushes or combs, but stuck out every which way and gave its owner the 
perpetual air of having just woken up, late, and in a hurry; and his 
endearingly high, shy and self-deprecating, but also hiccoughy and over- 
excited, giggle; all of which had helped turn his name, Jamshed, into this 
Jumpy that everybody, even first-time acquaintances, now automatically 
used; everybody, that is, except Pamela Chamcha. Saladin's wife, he 
thought, sucking away feverishly. -- Or widow? -- Or, God help me, wife, 
after all. He found himself resenting Chamcha. A return from a watery grave: 
so operatic an event, in this day and age, seemed almost indecent, an act of 
bad faith. 

He had rushed over to Pamela's place the moment he heard the news, and 
found her dry-eyed and composed. She led him into her clutter-lover's study 
on whose walls watercolours of rose-gardens hung between clenched—fist 
posters reading _Partido Socialista_, photographs of friends and a cluster of 
African masks, and as he picked his way across the floor between ashtrays 
and the _Voice_ newspaper and feminist science— fiction novels she said, 
flatly, "The surprising thing is that when they told me I thought, well, shrug, 
his death will actually make a pretty small hole in my life." Jumpy, who was 
close to tears, and bursting with memories, stopped in his tracks and flapped 
his arms, looking, in his great shapeless black coat, and with his pallid, 
terror— stricken face, like a vampire caught in the unexpected and hideous 
light of day. Then he saw the empty whisky bottles. Pamela had started 
drinking, she said, some hours back, and since then she had been going at it 
steadily, rhythmically, with the dedication of a long-distance runner. He sat 
down beside her on her low, squashy sofa-bed, and offered to act as a 
pacemaker. "Whatever you want," she said, and passed him the bottle. 



Now, sitting up in bed with a thumb instead of a bottle, his secret and his 
hangover banging equally painfully inside his head (he had never been a 
drinking or a secretive man), Jumpy felt tears coming on once again, and 
decided to get up and walk himself around. Where he went was upstairs, to 
what Saladin had insisted on calling his "den", a large loft--space with 
skylights and windows looking down on an expanse of communal gardens 
dotted with comfortable trees, oak, larch, even the last of the elms, a 
survivor of the plague years. _First the elms, now us_, Jumpy reflected. 
_Maybe the trees were a warning_. He shook himself to banish such small- 
hour morbidities, and perched on the edge of his friend's mahogany desk. 
Once at a college party he had perched, just so, on a table soggy with spilled 
wine and beer next to an emaciated girl in black lace minidress, purple 
feather boa and eyelids like silver helmets, unable to pluck up the courage to 
say hello. Finally he did turn to her and stutter out some banality or other; 
she gave him a look of absolute contempt and said without moving her 
black— lacquer lips, conversation's dead, man_. He had been pretty upset, 

so upset that he blurted out, tell me, why are all the girls in this town so 

rude?_, and she answered, without pausing to think, _because most of the 
boys are like you_. A few moments later Chamcha came up, reeking of 
patchouli, wearing a white kurta, everybody's goddamn cartoon of the 
mysteries of the East, and the girl left with him five minutes later. The 
bastard, Jumpy Joshi thought as the old bitterness surged back, he had no 
shame, he was ready to be anything they wanted to buy, that read-your- 
palm bedspread-jacket HareKrishna dharma-bum, you wouldn't have caught 
me dead. That stopped him, that word right there. Dead. Face it, Jamshed, 
the girls never went for you, that's the truth, and the rest is envy. Well, 
maybe so, he half-conceded, and then again. Maybe dead, he added, and 
then again, maybe not. 

Chamcha's room struck the sleepless intruder as contrived, and therefore 
sad: the caricature of an actor's room full of signed photographs of 
colleagues, handbills, framed programmes, production stills, citations, 
awards, volumes of movie—star memoirs, a room bought off the peg, by the 
yard, an imitation of life, a mask's mask. Novelty items on every surface: 
ashtrays in the shape of pianos, china pierrots peeping out from behind a 
shelf of books. And everywhere, on the walls, in the movie posters, in the 
glow of the lamp borne by bronze Eros, in the mirror shaped like a heart, 
oozing up through the blood-red carpet, dripping from the ceiling, Saladin's 
need for love. In the theatre everybody gets kissed and everybody is darling. 
The actor's life offers, on a daily basis, the simulacrum of love; a mask can 
be satisfied, or at least consoled, by the echo of what it seeks. The 
desperation there was in him, Jumpy recognized, he'd do anything, put on 
any damnfool costume, change into any shape, if it earned him a loving 
word. Saladin, who wasn't by any means unsuccessful with women, see 



above. The poor stumblebum. Even Pamela, with all her beauty and 
brightness, hadn't been enough. 

It was clear he'd been getting to be a long way from enough for her. 
Somewhere around the bottom of the second whisky bottle she leaned her 
head on his shoulder and said boozily, "You can't imagine the relief of being 
with someone with whom I don't have to have a fight every time I express 
an opinion. Someone on the side of the goddamn angels." He waited; after a 
pause, there was more. "Him and his Royal Family, you wouldn't believe. 
Cricket, the Houses of Parliament, the Queen. The place never stopped being 
a picture postcard to him. You couldn't get him to look at what was really 
real." She closed her eyes and allowed her hand, by accident, to rest on his. 
"He was a real Saladin," Jumpy said. "A man with a holy land to conquer, his 
England, the one he believed in. You were part of it, too." She rolled away 
from him and stretched out on top of magazines, crumpled balls of waste 
paper, mess. "Part of it? I was bloody Britannia. Warm beer, mince pies, 
common-sense and me. But I'm really real, too, J. J.; I really really am." She 
reached over to him, pulled him across to where her mouth was waiting, 
kissed him with a great un-Pamela-like slurp. "See what I mean?" Yes, he 
saw. 

"You should have heard him on the Falklands war," she said later, 
disengaging herself and fiddling with her hair. '"Pamela, suppose you heard 
a noise downstairs in the middle of the night and went to investigate and 
found a huge man in the livingroom with a shotgun, and he said, Go back 
upstairs, what would you do?' I'd go upstairs, I said. 'Well, it's like that. 
Intruders in the home. It won't do.' Jumpy noticed her fists had clenched 
and her knuckles were bone-white. "I said, if you must use these blasted 

cosy metaphors, then get them right. What it's li ke is if two people claim 

they own a house, and one of them is squatting the place, and _then_ the 
other turns up with the shotgun. That's what it's _like_." "That's what's 
really real," Jumpy nodded, seriously. "_Right_," she slapped his knee. 
"That's really right, Mr. Real Jam . . . it's really truly like that. Actually. 
Another drink." 

She leaned over to the tape deck and pushed a button. Jesus, Jumpy 
thought, _Boney M?_ Give me a break. For all her tough, race—professional 
attitudes, the lady still had a lot to learn about music. Here it came, 
boomchickaboom. Then, without warning, he was crying, provoked into real 
tears by counterfeit emotion, by a disco-beat imitation of pain. It was the 
one hundred and thirty-seventh psalm, "Super flumina". King David calling 
out across the centuries. How shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange land. 
"I had to learn the psalms at school," Pamela Chamcha said, sitting on the 
floor, her head leaning against the sofa-bed, her eyes shut tight. _By the 
river of Babylon, where we sat down, oh oh we wept_ . . . she stopped the 
tape, leaned back again, began to recite. "If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let 



my right hand forget its cunning; if I do not remember thee, let my tongue 
cleave to the roof of my mouth; yea, if I prefer not Jerusalem in my mirth." 
Later, asleep in bed, she dreamed of her convent school, of matins and 
evensong, of the chanting of psalms, when Jumpy rushed in and shook her 
awake, shouting, "It's no good, I've got to tell you. He isn't dead. Saladin: 
he's bloody well alive." 
ooo 

She came wide awake at once, plunging her hands into her thick, curly, 
hennaed hair, in which the first strands of white were just beginning to be 
noticeable; she knelt on the bed, naked, with her hands in her hair, unable 
to move, until Jumpy had finished speaking, and then, without warning, she 
began to hit out at him, punching him on the chest and arms and shoulders 
and even his face, as hard as she could hit. He sat down on the bed beside 
her, looking ridiculous in her frilly dressing-gown, while she beat him; he 
allowed his body to go loose, to receive the blows, to submit. When she ran 
out of punches her body was covered in perspiration and he thought she 
might have broken one of his arms. She sat down beside him, panting, and 
they were silent. 

Her dog entered the bedroom, looking worried, and padded over to offer her 
his paw, and to lick at her left leg. Jumpy stirred, cautiously. "I thought he 
got stolen," he said eventually. Pamela jerked her head for _yes, but_. "The 
thieves got in touch. I paid the ransom. He now answers to the name of 
Glenn. That's okay; I could never pronounce Sher Khan properly, anyway." 
After a while, Jumpy found that he wanted to talk. "What you did, just now," 
he began. 
"Oh, God." 

"No. It's like a thing I once did. Maybe the most sensible thing I ever did." In 
the summer of 1967, he had bullied the "apolitical" twenty-year-old Saladin 
along on an anti-war demonstration. "Once in your life, Mister Snoot; I'm 
going to drag you down to my level." Harold Wilson was coming to town, 
and because of the Labour Government's support of U S involvement in 
Vietnam, a mass protest had been planned. Chamcha went along, "out of 
curiosity," he said. "I want to see how allegedly intelligent people turn 
themselves into a mob." 

That day it rained an ocean. The demonstrators in Market Square were 
soaked through. Jumpy and Chamcha, swept along by the crowd, found 
themselves pushed up against the steps of the town hail; _grandstand view_ 
Chamcha said with heavy irony. Next to them stood two students disguised 
as Russian assassins, in black fedoras, greatcoats and dark glasses, carrying 
shoeboxes filled with ink-dipped tomatoes and labelled in large block letters, 
bombs. Shortly before the Prime Minister's arrival, one of them tapped a 
policeman on the shoulder and said: "Excuse, please. When Mr. Wilson, self- 
-styled Prime Meenster, comes in long car, kindly request to wind down 
weendow so my friend can throw with him the bombs." The policeman 



answered, "Ho, ho, sir. Very good. Now I'll tell you what. You can throw 
eggs at him, sir, "cause that's all right with me. And you can throw tomatoes 
at him, sir, like what you've got there in that box, painted black, labelled 
bombs, "cause that's all right with me. You throw anything hard at him, sir, 
and my mate here'll get you with his gun." O days of innocence when the 
world was young . . . when the car arrived there was a surge in the crowd 
and Chamcha and Jumpy were separated. Then Jumpy appeared, climbed on 
to the bonnet of Harold Wilson's limousine, and began to jump up and down 
on the bonnet, creating large dents, leaping like a wild man to the rhythm of 
the crowd's chanting: _We shall fight, we shall win, long live Ho Chi Minh_. 
"Saladin started yelling at me to get off, partly because the crowd was full of 
Special Branch types converging on the limo, but mainly because he was so 
damn embarrassed." But he kept leaping, up higher and down harder, 
drenched to the bone, long hair flying: Jumpy the jumper, leaping into the 
mythology of those antique years. And Wilson and Marcia cowered in the 
back seat. _Ho! Ho! Ho Chi Minh!_ At the last possible moment Jumpy took 
a deep breath, and dived head-first into a sea of wet and friendly faces; and 
vanished. They never caught him: fuzz pigs filth. "Saladin wouldn't speak to 
me for over a week," Jumpy remembered. "And when he did, all he said was, 
'I hope you realize those cops could have shot you to pieces, but they 
didn't.' 

They were still sitting side by side on the edge of the bed. Jumpy touched 
Pamela on the forearm. "I just mean I know how it feels. Wham, barn. It felt 
incredible. It felt necessary." 

"Oh, my God," she said, turning to him. "Oh, my God, I'm sorry, but yes, it 
did." 

0 0 0 

In the morning it took an hour to get through to the airline on account of the 
volume of calls still being generated by the catastrophe, and then another 
twenty-five minutes of insistence -- _but he telephoned, it was his voice_ -- 
while at the other end of the phone a woman's voice, professionally trained 
to deal with human beings in crisis, understood how she felt and 
sympathized with her in this awful moment and remained very patient, but 
clearly didn't believe a word she said. _I'm sorry, madam, I don't mean to 
be brutal, but the plane broke up in mid-air at thirty thousand feet_. By the 
end of the call Pamela Chamcha, normally the most controlled of women, 
who locked herself in a bathroom when 



she wanted to cry, was shrieking down the line, for God's sake, woman, will 
you shut up with your little good-samaritan speeches and listen to what I'm 
saying? Finally she slammed down the receiver and rounded on Jumpy Joshi, 
who saw the expression in her eyes and spilled the coffee he had been 
bringing her because his limbs began to tremble in fright. "You fucking 
creep," she cursed him. "Still alive, is he? I suppose he flew down from the 
sky on fucking _wings_ and headed straight for the nearest phone booth to 
change out of his fucking Superman costume and ring the little wife." They 
were in the kitchen and Jumpy noticed a group of kitchen knives attached to 
a magnetic strip on the wall next to Pamela's left arm. He opened his mouth 
to speak, but she wouldn't let him. "Get out before I do something," she said. 
"I can't believe I fell for it. You and voices on the phone: I should have 
fucking known." 

In the early 1970S Jumpy had run a travelling disco out of the back of his 
yellow mini-van. He called it Finn's Thumb in honour of the legendary 
sleeping giant of Ireland, Finn MacCool, another sucker, as Chamcha used to 
say. One day Saladin had played a practical joke on Jumpy, by ringing him 
up, putting on a vaguely Mediterranean accent, and requesting the services 
of the musical Thumb on the island of Skorpios, on behalf of Mrs. Jacqueline 
Kennedy Onassis, offering a fee often thousand dollars and transportation 
to Greece, in a private aircraft, for up to six persons. This was a terrible 
thing to do to a man as innocent and upright as Jamshed Joshi. "I need an 
hour to think," he had said, and then fallen into an agony of the soul. When 
Saladin rang back an hour later and heard that Jumpy was turning down Mrs. 
Onassis's offer for political reasons, he understood that his friend was in 
training to be a saint, and it was no good trying to pull his leg. "Mrs. Onassis 
will be broken in the heart for sure," he had concluded, and Jumpy had 
worriedly replied, "Please tell her it's nothing personal, as a matter of fact 
personally I admire her a great deal." 

We have all known one another too long, Pamela thought as Jumpy left. We 

can hurt each other with memories two decades old. 

ooo 

On the subject of mistakes with voices, she thought as she drove much too 
fast down the M4 that afternoon in the old MG hardtop from which she got a 
degree of pleasure that was, as she had always cheerfully 



confessed, "quite ideologically unsound", -- on that subject, I really ought to 
be more charitable. 

Pamela Chamcha, nee Lovelace, was the possessor of a voice for which, in 
many ways, the rest of her life had been an effort to compensate. It was a 
voice composed of tweeds, headscarves, summer pudding, hockey-sticks, 
thatched houses, saddle-soap, house—parties, nuns, family pews, large dogs 
and philistinism, and in spite of all her attempts to reduce its volume it was 
loud as a dinner-jacketed drunk throwing bread rolls in a Club. It had been 
the tragedy of her younger days that thanks to this voice she had been 
endlessly pursued by the gentlemen farmers and debs' delights and 
somethings in the city whom she despised with all her heart, while the 
greenies and peacemarchers and world—changers with whom she 
instinctively felt at home treated her with deep suspicion, bordering on 
resentment. How could one be _on the side of the angels_ when one 
sounded like a no-goodnik every time one moved one's lips? Accelerating 
past Reading, Pamela gritted her teeth. One of the reasons she had decided 
to _admit it_ end her marriage before fate did it for her was that she had 
woken up one day and realized that Chamcha was not in love with her at all, 
but with that voice stinking of Yorkshire pudding and hearts of oak, that 
hearty, rubicund voice of ye olde dream-England which he so desperately 
wanted to inhabit. It had been a marriage of crossed purposes, each of them 
rushing towards the very thing from which the other was in flight. 
_No survivors_. And in the middle of the night, Jumpy the idiot and his 
stupid false alarm. She was so shaken up by it that she hadn't even got 
round to being shaken up by having gone to bed with Jumpy and made love 
in what _admit it_ had been a pretty satisfying fashion, _spare me your 
nonchalance_, she rebuked herself, _when did you last have so much fun_. 
She had a lot to deal with and so here she was, dealing with it by running 
away as fast as she could go. A few days of pampering oneself in an 
expensive country hotel and the world may begin to seem less like a fucking 
hellhole. Therapy by luxury: okayokay, she allowed, I know: I'm _reverting 
to class_. Fuck it; watch me go. If you've got any objections, blow them out 
of your ass. Arse. Ass. 

One hundred miles an hour past Swindon, and the weather turned nasty. 
Sudden, dark clouds, lightning, heavy rain; she kept her foot on the 
accelerator. _No survivors_. People were always dying on her, leaving her 



with a mouth full of words and nobody to spit them at. Her father the 
classical scholar who could make puns in ancient Greek and from whom she 
inherited the Voice, her legacy and curse; and her mother who pined for him 
during the War, when he was a Pathfinder pilot, obliged to fly home from 
Germany one hundred and eleven times in a slow aeroplane through a night 
which his own flares had just illuminated for the benefit of the bombers, -- 
and who vowed, when he returned with the noise of the ack-ack in his ears, 
that she would never leave him, -- and so followed him everywhere, into the 
slow hollow of depression from which he never really emerged, -- and into 
debt, because he didn't have the face for poker and used her money when 
he ran out of his own, -- and at last to the top of a tall building, where they 
found their way at last. Pamela never forgave them, especially for making it 
impossible for her to tell them of her unforgiveness. To get her own back, 
she set about rejecting everything of them that remained within her. Her 
brains, for example: she refused to go to college. And because she could not 
shake off her voice, she made it speak ideas which her conservative suicides 
of parents would have anathematized. She married an Indian. And, because 
he turned out to be too much like them, would have left him. Had decided to 
leave. When, once again, she was cheated by a death. 
She was overtaking a frozen-food road train, blinded by the spray kicked up 
by its wheels, when she hit the expanse of water that had been waiting for 
her in a slight declivity, and then the M G was aquaplaning at terrifying 
speed, swerving out of the fast lane and spinning round so that she saw the 
headlights of the road train staring at her like the eyes of the exterminating 
angel, Azrael. "Curtains," she thought; but her car swung and skidded out of 
the path of the juggernaut, slewing right across all three lanes of the 
motorway, all of them miraculously empty, and coming to rest with rather 
less of a thump than one might have expected against the crash barrier at 
the edge of the hard shoulder, after spinning through a further one hundred 
and eighty degrees to face, once again, into the west, where with all the 
corny timing of real life, the sun was breaking up the storm, 
ooo 

The fact of being alive compensated for what life did to one. That night, in 
an oak-panelled dining-room decorated with medieval flags, Pamela 
Chamcha in her most dazzling gown ate venison and drank a bottle of 



Chateau Talbot at a table heavy with silver and crystal, celebrating a new 
beginning, an escape from the jaws of, a fresh start, to be born again first 
you have to: well, almost, anyway. Under the lascivious eyes of Americans 
and salesmen she ate and drank alone, retiring early to a princess's 
bedroom in a stone tower to take a long bath and watch old movies on 
television. In the aftermath of her brush with death she felt the past 
dropping away from her: her adolescence, for example, in the care of her 
wicked uncle Harry Higham, who lived in a seventeenth-century manor 
house once owned by a distant relative, Matthew Hopkins, the Witchfinder- 
General, who had named it Gremlins in, no doubt, a macabre attempt at 
humour. Remembering Mr. Justice Higham in order to forget him, she 
murmured to the absent Jumpy that she, too, had her Vietnam story. After 
the first big Grosvenor Square demonstration at which many people threw 
marbles under the feet of charging police horses, there occurred the one and 
only instance in British law in which the marble was deemed to be a lethal 
weapon, and young persons were jailed, even deported, for possessing the 
small glass spheres. The presiding judge in the case of the Grosvenor 
Marbles was this same Henry (thereafter known as "Hang"em") Higham, and 
to be his niece had been a further burden for a young woman already 
weighed down by her right-wing voice. Now, warm in bed in her temporary 
castle, Pamela Chamcha rid herself of this old demon, _goodbye, Hang"eni, 
I've no more time for you_; and of her parents' ghosts; and prepared to be 
free of the most recent ghost of all. 

Sipping cognac, Pamela watched vampires on TV and allowed herself to take 
pleasure in, well, in herself. Had she not invented herself in her own image? 
I am that I am, she toasted herself in Napoleon brandy. I work in a 
community relations council in the borough of Brickhall, London, NET; 
deputy community relations officer and damn good at it, ifisaysomyself. 
Cheers! We just elected our first black Chair and all the votes cast against 
him were white. Down the hatch! Last week a respected Asian street trader, 
for whom M Ps of all parties had interceded, was deported after eighteen 
years in Britain because, fifteen years ago, he posted a certain form forty- 
eight hours late. Chin-chin! Next week in Brickhall Magistrates' Court the 
police will be trying to fit up a fifty-year-old Nigerian woman, accusing her of 
assault, having previously beaten her senseless. Skol! This is my head: see 
it? What I call my job: bashing my head against Brickhall. 



Saladin was dead and she was alive. 

She drank to that. There were things I was waiting to tell you, Saladin. 
Some big things: about the new high-rise office building in Brickhall High 
Street, across from McDonald"s; -- they built it to be perfectly sound-proof, 
but the workers were so disturbed by the silence that now they play tapes of 
white noise on the tannoy system. -- You'd have liked that, eh? -- And about 
this Parsi woman I know, Bapsy, that's her name, she lived in Germany for a 
while and fell in love with a Turk. -- Trouble was, the only language they had 
in common was German; now Bapsy has forgotten almost all she knew, 
while his gets better and better; he writes her increasingly poetic letters and 
she can hardly reply in nursery rhyme. -- Love dying, because of an 
inequality of language, what do you think of that? -- Love dying. There's a 
subject for us, eb? Saladin? What do you say? 

And a couple of tiny little things. There's a killer on the loose in my patch, 
specializes in killing old women; so don't worry, I'm safe. Plenty older than 
me. 

One more thing: I'm leaving you. It's over. We're through. 
I could never say anything to you, not really, not the least thing. If I said 
you were putting on weight you'd yell for an hour, as if it would change what 
you saw in the mirror, what the tightness of your own trousers was telling 
you. You interrupted me in public. People noticed it, what you thought of me. 
I forgave you, that was my fault; I could see the centre of you, that question 
so frightful that you had to protect it with all that posturing certainty. That 
empty space. 

Goodbye, Saladin. She drained her glass and set it down beside her. The 
returning rain knocked at her leaded windows; she drew her curtains shut 
and turned out the light. 

Lying there, drifting towards sleep, she thought of the last thing she needed 
to tell her late husband. "In bed," the words came, "you never seemed 
interested in me; not in my pleasure, what I needed, not really ever. I came 
to think you wanted, not a lover. A servant." There. Now rest in peace. 



She dreamed of him, his face, filling the dream. "Things are ending," he told 
her. "This civilization; things are closing in on it. It has been quite a culture, 
brilliant and foul, cannibal and Christian, the glory of the world. We should 
celebrate it while we can; until night falls." 

She didn't agree, not even in the dream, but she knew, as she dreamed, 

that there was no point telling him now. 

ooo 

After Pamela Chamcha threw him out, Jumpy Joshi went over to Mr. 
Sufyan's Shaandaar Cafe in Brickhall High Street and sat there trying to 
decide if he was a fool. It was early in the day, so the place was almost 
empty, apart from a fat lady buying a box of pista barfi and jalebis, a couple 
of bachelor garment workers drinking chaloo chai and an elderly Polish 
woman from the old days when it was the Jews who ran the sweatshops 
round here, who sat all day in a corner with two vegetable samosas, one pun 
and a glass of milk, announcing to everyone who came in that she was only 
there because "it was next best to kosher and today you must do the best 
you can". Jumpy sat down with his coffee beneath the lurid painting of a 
bare-breasted myth-woman with several heads and wisps of clouds 
obscuring her nipples, done life-size in salmon pink, neon-green and gold, 
and because the rush hadn't started yet Mr. Sufyan noticed he was down in 
the dumps. 

"Hey, Saint Jumpy," he sang out, "why you bringing your bad weather into 
my place? This country isn't full enough of clouds?" 
Jumpy blushed as Sufyan bounced over to him, his little white cap of 
devotion pinned in place as usual, the moustache-less beard hennaed red 
after its owner's recent pilgrimage to Mecca. Muhammad Sufyan was a burly, 
thick-forearmed fellow with a belly on him, as godly and as unfanatic a 
believer as you could meet, and Joshi thought of himas a sort of elder 
relative. "Listen, Uncle," he said when the cafe proprietor was standing over 
him, "you think I'm a real idiot or what?" 
"You ever make any money?" Sufyan asked. 
"Not me, Uncle." 



"Ever do any business? Import-export? Off-licence? Corner shop?" 

"I never understood figures." 

"And where your family members are?" 

"I've got no family, Uncle. There's only me." 

"Then you must be praying to God continually for guidance in your 
loneliness?" 

"You know me, Uncle. I don't pray." 

"No question about it," Sufyan concluded. "You're an even bigger fool than 
you know." 

"Thanks, Uncle," Jumpy said, finishing his coffee. "You've been a great help." 
Sufyan, knowing that the affection in his teasing was cheering the other man 
up in spite of his long face, called across to the light-skinned, blue-eyed 
Asian man who had just come in wearing a snappy check overcoat with 
extra-wide lapels. "You, Hanif Johnson," he called out, "come here and solve 
a mystery. "Johnson, a smart lawyer and local boy made good, who 
maintained an office above the Shaandaar Cafe, tore himself away from 
Sufyan's two beautiful daughters and headed over to Jumpy's table. "You 
explain this fellow," Sufyan said. "Beats me. Doesn't drink, thinks of money 
like a disease, owns maybe two shirts and no V C R, forty years old and isn't 
married, works for two pice in the sports centre teaching martial arts and 
what--all, lives on air, behaves like a rishi or pir but doesn't have any faith, 
going nowhere but looks like he knows some secret. All this and a college 
education, you work it out." 

Hanif Johnson punched Jumpy on the shoulder. "He hears voices," he said. 
Sufyan threw up his hands in mock amazement. "Voices, oop-baba! Voices 
from where? Telephone? Sky? Sony Walkman hidden in his coat?" 
"Inner voices," Hanif said solemnly. "Upstairs on his desk there's a piece of 
paper with some verses written on it. And a title: _The River of Blood_." 
Jumpy jumped, knocking over his empty cup. "I'll kill you," he shouted at 
Hanif, who skipped quickly across the room, singing out, "We got a poet in 
our midst, Sufyan Sahib. Treat with respect. Handle with care. He says a 
street is a river and we are the flow; humanity is a river of blood, that's the 
poet's point. Also the individual human being," he broke off to run around to 
the far side of an eight--seater table as Jumpy came after him, blushing 
furiously, flapping his arms. "In our very bodies, does the river of blood not 
flow?" _l_ike the Roman_, the ferrety Enoch Powell had said, _I seem to see 
the river Tiber foaming with much blood_. Reclaim the metaphor, Jumpy 
Joshi had told himself. Turn it; make it a thing we can use. "This is like 
rape," he pleaded with Hanif. "For God's sake, stop." 
"Voices that one hears are outside, but," the cafe proprietor was musing. 
"Joan of Arc, na. Or that what's his name with the cat: Turn-again 
Whittington. But with such voices one becomes great, or rich at least. This 
one however is not great, and poor." 



"Enough." Jumpy held both arms above his head, grinning without really 
wanting to. "I surrender." 

For three days after that, in spite of all the efforts of Mr. Sufyan, Mrs. 
Sufyan, their daughters Mishal and Anahita, and the lawyer Hanif Johnson, 
Jumpy Joshi was not really himself, "More a Dumpy than a Jumpy," as 
Sufyan said. He went about his business, at the youth clubs, at the offices of 
the film co-operative to which he belonged, and in the streets, distributing 
leaflets, selling certain newspapers, hanging out; but his step was heavy as 
he went his way. Then, on the fourth evening, the telephone rang behind the 
counter of the Shaandaar Cafe. 

"Mr. Jamshed Joshi," Anahita Sufyan carolled, doing her imitation of an 
upper—class English accent. "Will Mr. Joshi please come to the instrument? 
There is a personal call." 

Her father took one look at the joy bursting out on Jumpy's face and 
murmured softly to his wife, "Mrs, the voice this boy is wanting to hear is 
not inner by any manner of means." 

ooo 

The impossible thing came between Pamela and Jamshed after they had 
spent seven days making love to one another with inexhaustible enthusiasm, 
infinite tenderness and such freshness of spirit that you'd have thought the 
procedure had only just been invented. For seven days they remained 
undressed with the central heating turned high, and pretended to be tropical 
lovers in some hot bright country to the south. Jamshed, who had always 
been clumsy with women, told Pamela that he had not felt so wonderful 
since the day in his eighteenth year when he had finally learned how to ride 
a bicycle. The moment the words were out he became afraid that he had 
spoiled everything, that this comparison of the great love of his life to the 
rickety bike of his student days would be taken for the insult it undeniably 
was; but he needn't have worried, because Pamela kissed him on the mouth 
and thanked him for saying the most beautiful thing any man had ever said 
to any woman. At this point he understood that he could do no wrong, and 
for the first time in his life he began to. feel genuinely safe, safe as houses, 
safe as a human being who is loved; and so did Pamela Chamcha. 
On the seventh night they were awakened from dreamless sleep by the 
unmistakable sound of somebody trying to break into the house. "I've got a 
hockey-stick under my bed," Pamela whispered, terrified. "Give it to me," 
Jumpy, who was equally scared, hissed back. "I'm coming with you," quaked 
Pamela, and Jumpy quavered, "Oh, no you don't." In the end they both crept 
downstairs, each wearing one of Pamela's frilly dressing-gowns, each with a 
hand on the hockey-stick that neither felt brave enough to use. Suppose it's 
a man with a shotgun, Pamela found herself thinking, a man with a shotgun 
saying, Go back upstairs . . . They reached the foot of the stairs. Somebody 
turned on the lights. 



Pamela and Jumpy screamed in unison, dropped the hockeystick and ran 
upstairs as fast as they could go; while down in the front hail, standing 
brightly illuminated by the front door with the glass panel it had smashed in 
order to turn the knob of the tongue-and-groove lock (Pamela in the throes 
of her passion had forgotten to use the security locks), was a figure out of a 
nightmare or a late-night TV movie, a figure covered in mud and ice and 
blood, the hairiest creature you ever saw, with the shanks and hoofs of a 
giant goat, a man's torso covered in goat's hair, human arms, and a horned 
but otherwise human head covered in muck and grime and the beginnings of 
a beard. Alone and unobserved, the impossible thing pitched forward on to 
the floor and lay still. Upstairs, at the very top of the house, that is to say in 
Saladin's "den", Mrs. Pamela Chamcha was writhing in her lover's arms, 
crying her heart out, and bawling at the top of her voice: "It isn't true. My 
husband exploded. No survivors. Do you hear me? I am the widow Chamcha 
whose spouse is beastly dead." 
5 

Mr. Gibreel Farishta on the railway train to London was once again seized as 
who would not be by the fear that God had decided to punish him for his loss 
of faith by driving him insane. He had seated himself by the window in a 
first-class non-smoking compartment, with his back to the engine because 
unfortunately another fellow was already in the other place, and jamming his 
trilby down on his head he sat with his fists deep in scarlet—lined gabardine 
and panicked. The terror of losing his mind to a paradox, of being unmade 
by what he no longer believed existed, of turning in his madness into the 
avatar of a chimerical archangel, was so big in him that it was impossible to 
look at it for long; yet how else was he to account for the miracles, 
metamorphoses and apparitions of recent days? "It's a straight choice," he 
trembled silently. "It's A, I'm off my head, or B, baba, somebody went and 
changed the rules." 

Now, however, there was the comforting cocoon of this railway compartment 
in which the miraculous was reassuringly absent, the arm-rests were frayed, 
the reading light over his shoulder didn't work, the mirror was missing from 
its frame, and then there were the regulations: the little circular red— and— 
white signs forbidding smoking, the stickers penalizing the improper use of 
the chain, the arrows indicating the points to which -- and not beyond! -- it 
was permitted to open the little sliding windows. Gibreel paid a visit to the 
toilet and here, too, a small series of prohibitions and instructions gladdened 
his heart. By the time the conductor arrived with the authority of his 
crescent-cutting ticket-punch, Gibreel had been somewhat soothed by these 
manifestations of law, and began to perk up and invent rationalizations. He 
had had a lucky escape from death, a subsequent delirium of some sort, and 
now, restored to himself, could expect the threads of his old life -- that is, 
his old new life, the new life he had planned before the er interruption -- to 
be picked up again. As the train carried him further and further away from 



the twilight zone of his arrival and subsequent mysterious captivity, bearing 
him along the happy predictability of parallel metal lines, he felt the pull of 
the great city beginning to work its magic on him, and his old gift of hope 
reasserted itself, his talent for embracing renewal, for blinding himself to 
past hardships so that the future could come into view. He sprang up from 
his seat and thumped down on the opposite side of the compartment, with 
his face symbolically towards London, even though it meant giving up the 
window. What did he care for windows? All the London he wanted was right 
there, in his mind's eye. He spoke her name aloud: "Alleluia." 
"Alleluia, brother," the compartment's only other occupant affirmed. 
"Hosanna, my good sir, and amen." 

ooo 

"Although I must add, sir, that my beliefs are strictly non-denominational," 
the stranger continued. "Had you said 'La--ilaha', I would gladly have 
responded with a full-throated 'illallah'." 

Gibreel realized that his move across the compartment and his inadvertent 
taking of Allie's unusual name had been mistaken by his companion for 
overtures both social and theological. "John Maslama," the fellow cried, 
snapping a card out of a little crocodile-skin case and pressing it upon 
Gibreel. "Personally, I follow my own variant of the universal faith invented 
by the Emperor Akbar. God, I would say, is something akin to the Music of 
the Spheres." 

It was plain that Mr. Maslama was bursting with words, and that, now that 
he had popped, there was nothing for it but to sit it out, to permit the 
torrent to run its orotund course. As the fellow had the build of a prize- 
fighter, it seemed inadvisable to irritate him. In his eyes Farishta spotted the 
glint of the True Believer, a light which, until recently, he had seen in his 
own shaving-mirror every day. 

"I have done well for myself, sir," Maslama was boasting in his well- 
modulated Oxford drawl. "For a brown man, exceptionally well, considering 
the quiddity of the circumstances in which we live; as I hope you will allow." 
With a small but eloquent sweep of his thick ham of a hand, he indicated the 
opulence of his attire: the bespoke tailoring of his three-piece pin-stripe, the 
gold watch with its fob and chain, the Italian shoes, the crested silk tie, the 
jewelled links at his starched white cuffs. 



Above this costume of an English milord there stood a head of startling size, 
covered with thick, slicked-down hair, and sprouting implausibly luxuriant 
eyebrows beneath which blazed the ferocious eyes of which Gibreel had 
already taken careful note. "Pretty fancy," Gibreel now conceded, some 
response being clearly required. Maslama nodded. "I have always tended," 
he admitted, "towards the ornate." 

He had made what he called his _first pile_ producing advertising jingles, 
"that ol" devil music", leading women into lingerie and lip-gloss and men into 
temptation. Now he owned record stores all over town, a successful 
nightclub called Hot Wax, and a store full of gleaming musical instruments 
that was his special pride and joy. He was an Indian from Guyana, "but 
there's nothing left in that place, sir. People are leaving it faster than planes 
can fly." He had made good in quick time, "by the grace of God Almighty. 
I'm a regular Sunday man, sir; I confess to a weakness for the English 
Hymnal, and I sing to raise the roof." 

The autobiography was concluded with a brief mention of the existence of a 
wife and some dozen children. Gibreel offered his congratulations and hoped 
for silence, but now Maslama dropped his bombshell. "You don't need to tell 
me about yourself," he said jovially. "Naturally I know who you are, even if 
one does not expect to see such a personage on the Eastbourne-Victoria 
line." He winked leeringly and placed a finger alongside his nose. "Mum's the 
word. I respect a man's privacy, no question about it; no question at all." 
"I? Who am I?" Gibreel was startled into absurdity. The other nodded 
weightily, his eyebrows waving like soft antlers. "The prize question, in my 
opinion. These are problematic times, sir, for a moral man. When a man is 
unsure of his essence, how may he know if he be good or bad? But you are 
finding me tedious. I answer my own questions by my faith in It, sir," -- 
here Maslama pointed to the ceiling of the railway compartment -- "and of 
course you are not in the least confused about your identity, for you are the 
famous, the may I say legendary Mr. Gibreel Farishta, star of screen and, 
increasingly, I'm sorry to add, of pirate video; my twelve children, one wife 
and I are all long-standing, unreserved admirers of your divine heroics." He 
grabbed, and pumped Gibreel's right hand. 

"Tending as I do towards the pantheistic view," Maslama thundered on, "my 
own sympathy for your work arises out of your willingness to portray deities 
of every conceivable water. You, sir, are a rainbow coalition of the celestial; 
a walking United Nations of gods! You are, in short, the future. Permit me to 
salute you." He was beginning to give off the unmistakable odour of the 
genuine crazy, and even though he had not yet said or done anything 
beyond the merely idiosyncratic, Gibreel was getting alarmed and measuring 
the distance to the door with anxious little glances. "I incline, sir," Maslama 
was saying, "towards the opinion that whatever name one calls It by is no 
more than a code; a cypher, Mr. Farishta, behind which the true name lies 
concealed." 



Gibreel remained silent, and Maslama, making no attempt to hide his 
disappointment, was obliged to speak for him. "What is that true name, I 
hear you inquire," he said, and then Gibreel knew he was right; the man was 
a full-fledged lunatic, and his autobiography was very likely as much of a 
concoction as his "faith". Fictions were walking around wherever he went, 
Gibreel reflected, fictions masquerading as real human beings. "I have 
brought him upon me," he accused himself. "By fearing for my own sanity I 
have brought forth, from God knows what dark recess, this voluble and 
maybe dangerous nut." 

"You don't know it!" Maslama yelled suddenly, jumping to his feet. 
"Charlatan! Poser! Fake! You claim to be the screen immortal, avatar of a 
hundred and one gods, and you haven't a _foggy!_ How is it possible that I, 
a poor boy made good from Bartica on the Essequibo, can know such things 
while Gibreel Farishta does not? Phoney! Phooey to you!" 
Gibreel got to his feet, but the other was filling almost all the available 
standing room, and he, Gibreel, had to lean over awkwardly to one side to 
escape Maslama's windmilling arms, one of which knocked off his grey trilby. 
At once Maslama's mouth fell open. He seemed to shrink several inches, and 
after a few frozen moments, he fell to his knees with a thud. 
What's he doing down there, Gibreel wondered, picking up my hat? But the 
madman was begging for forgiveness. "I never doubted you would come," 
he was saying. "Pardon my clumsy rage." The train entered a tunnel, and 
Gibreel saw that they were surrounded by a warm golden light that was 
coming from a point just behind his head. In the glass of the sliding door, he 
saw the reflection of the halo around his hair. Maslama was struggling with 
his shoelaces. "All my life, sir, I knew I had been chosen," he was saying in 
a voice as humble as it had earlier been menacing. "Even as a child in 
Bartica, I knew." He pulled off his right shoe and began to roll down his sock. 
"I was given," he said, "a sign." The sock was removed, revealing what 
looked to be a perfectly ordinary, if outsize, foot. Then Gibreel counted and 
counted again, from one to six. "The same on the other foot," Maslama said 
proudly. "I never doubted the meaning for a minute." He was the self- 
appointed helpmate of the Lord, the sixth toe on the foot of the Universal 
Thing. Something was badly amiss with the spiritual life of the planet, 
thought Gibreel Farishta. Too many demons inside people claiming to believe 
in God. 

The train emerged from the tunnel. Gibreel took a decision. "Stand, six-toed 
John," he intoned in his best Hindi movie manner. "Maslama, arise." 
The other scrambled to his feet and stood pulling at his fingers, his head 
bowed. "What I want to know, sir," he mumbled, "is, which is it to be? 
Annihilation or salvation? Why have you returned?" 

Gibreel thought rapidly. "It is forjudging," he finally answered. "Facts in the 
case must be sifted, due weight given pro and contra. Here it is the human 
race that is the undertrial, and it is a defendant with a rotten record: a 



history-sheeter, a bad egg. Careful evaluations must be made. For the 
present, verdict is reserved; will be promulgated in due course. In the 
meantime, my presence must remain a secret, for vital security reasons." He 
put his hat back on his head, feeling pleased with himself. 
Maslama was nodding furiously. "You can depend on me," he promised. "I'm 
a man who respects a person's privacy. Mum" -- for the second time! — "is 
the word." 

Gibreel fled the compartment with the lunatic's hymns in hot pursuit. As he 
rushed to the far end of the train Maslama's paeans remained faintly audible 
behind him. "Alleluia! Alleluia!" Apparently his new disciple had launched into 
selections from Handel's _Messiah_. 

However: Gibreel wasn't followed, and there was, fortunately, a first—class 
carriage at the rear of the train, too. This one was of open—plan design, with 
comfortable orange seats arranged in fours around tables, and Gibreel 
settled down by a window, staring towards London, with his chest thumping 
and his hat jammed down on his head. He was trying to come to terms with 
the undeniable fact of the halo, and failing to do so, because what with the 
derangement of John Maslama behind him and the excitement of Alleluia 
Cone ahead it was hard to get his thoughts straight. Then to his despair Mrs. 
Rekha Merchant floated up alongside his window, sitting on her flying 
Bokhara, evidently impervious to the snowstorm that was building up out 
there and making England look like a television set after the day's 
programmes end. She gave him a little wave and he felt hope ebbing from 
him. Retribution on a levitating rug: he closed his eyes and concentrated on 
trying not to shake. 

ooo 

"I know what a ghost is," Allie Cone said to a classroom of teenage girls 
whose faces were illuminated by the soft inner light of worship. "In the high 
Himalayas it is often the case that climbers find themselves being 
accompanied by the ghosts of those who failed in the attempt, or the sadder, 
but also prouder, ghosts of those who succeeded in reaching the summit, 
only to perish on the way down." 

Outside, in the Fields, the snow was settling on the high, bare trees, and on 
the flat expanse of the park. Between the low, dark snow-clouds and the 
white-carpeted city the light was a dirty yellow colour, a narrow, foggy light 
that dulled the heart and made it impossible to dream. Up _there_, Allie 
remembered, up there at eight thousand metres, the light was of such 
clarity that it seemed to resonate, to sing, like music. Here on the flat earth 
the light, too, was flat and earthbound. Here nothing flew, the sedge was 
withered, and no birds sang. Soon it would be dark. 
"Ms Cone?" The girls' hands, waving in the air, drew her back into the 
classroom. "Ghosts, miss? Straight up?" "You're pulling our legs, right?" 
Scepticism wrestled with adoration in their faces. She knew the question 
they really wanted to ask, and probably would not: the question of the 



miracle of her skin. She had heard them whispering excitedly as she entered 
the classroom, 's true, look, how _pale_, 's incredible. Alleluia Cone, whose 
iciness could resist the heat of the eight-thousand-metre sun. Allie the snow 
maiden, the icequeen. _Miss, how come you never get a tan?_ When she 
went up Everest with the triumphant Collingwood expedition, the papers 
called them Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, though she was no 
Disneyish cutie, her full lips pale rather than rose--red, her hair ice-blonde 
instead of black, her eyes not innocently wide but narrowed, out of habit, 
against the high snowglare. A memory of Gibreel Farishta welled up, 
catching her unawares: Gibreel at some point during their three and a half 
days, booming with his usual foot-in-mouth lack of restraint, "Baby, you're 
no iceberg, whatever they say. You're a passionate lady, bibi. Hot, like a 
kachori." He had pretended to blow on scalded fingertips, and shook his 
hand for emphasis: _0, too hot. O, throw water_. Gibreel Farishta. She 
controlled herself: Hi ho, it's off to work. 

"Ghosts," she repeated firmly. "On the Everest climb, after I came through 
the ice-fall, I saw a man sitting on an outcrop in the lotus position, with his 
eyes shut and a tartan tam--o"--shanter on his head, chanting the old 
mantra: om mani padme hum." She had guessed at once, from his archaic 
clothing and surprising behaviour, that this was the spectre of Maurice 
Wilson, the yogi who had prepared for a solo ascent of Everest, back in 1934, 
by starving himself for three weeks in order to cement so deep a union 
between his body and soul that the mountain would be too weak to tear 
them apart. He had gone up in a light aircraft as high as it would take him, 
crash-landed deliberately in a snowfield, headed upwards, and never 
returned. Wilson opened his eyes as Allie approached, and nodded lightly in 
greeting. He strolled beside her for the rest of that day, or hung in the air 
while she worked her way up a face. Once he belly-flopped into the snow of 
a sharp incline and glided upwards as if he were riding on an invisible anti- 
gravity toboggan. Allie had found herself behaving quite naturally, as if she'd 
just bumped into an old acquaintance, for reasons afterwards obscure to her. 
Wilson chattered on a fair bit — "Don't get a lot of company these days, one 
way and another" -- and expressed, among other things, his deep irritation 
at having had his body discovered by the Chinese expedition of 1960. "Little 
yellow buggers actually had the gall, the sheer face, to film my corpse." 
Alleluia Cone was struck by the bright, yellow-and-black tartan of his 
immaculate knickerbockers. All this she told the girls at Brickhall Fields Girls' 
School, who had written so many letters pleading for her to address them 
that she had not been able to refuse. "You've got to," they pleaded in writing. 
"You even live here." From the window of the classroom she could see her 
flat across the park, just visible through the thickening fall of snow. 
What she did not tell the class was this: as Maurice Wilson's ghost described, 
in patient detail, his own ascent, and also his posthumous discoveries, for 
example the slow, circuitous, infinitely delicate and invariably unproductive 



mating ritual of the yeti, which he had witnessed recently on the South Col, 
-- so it occurred to her that her vision of the eccentric of 1934, the first 
human being ever to attempt to scale Everest on his own, a sort of 
abominable snowman himself, had been no accident, but a kind of signpost, 
a declaration of kinship. A prophecy of the future, perhaps, for it was at that 
moment that her secret dream was born, the impossible thing: the dream of 
the unaccompanied climb. It was possible, also, that Maurice Wilson was the 
angel of her death. 

"I wanted to talk about ghosts," she was saying, "because most 
mountaineers, when they come down from the peaks, grow embarrassed 
and leave these stories out of their accounts. But they do exist, I have to 
admit it, even though I'm the type who's always kept her feet on solid 
ground." 

That was a laugh. Her feet. Even before the ascent of Everest she had begun 
to suffer from shooting pains, and was informed by her general practitioner, 
a no-nonsense Bombay woman called Dr. Mistry, that she was suffering from 
fallen arches. "In common parlance, flat feet." Her arches, always weak, had 
been further weakened by years of wearing sneakers and other unsuitable 
shoes. Dr. Mistry couldn't recommend much: toe-clenching exercises, 
running upstairs barefoot, sensible footwear. "You're young enough," she 
said. "If you take care, you'll live. If not, you'll be a cripple at forty." When 
Gibreel -- damn it! -- heard that she had climbed Everest with spears in her 
feet he took to calling her his silkie. He had read a Bumper Book of fairy- 
tales in which he found the story of the sea-woman who left the ocean and 
took on human form for the sake of the man she loved. She had feet instead 
of fins, but every step she took was an agony, as if she were walking over 
broken glass; yet she went on walking, forward, away from the sea and over 
land. You did it for a bloody mountain, he said. Would you do it for a man? 
She had concealed her foot-ache from her fellow-mountaineers because the 
lure of Everest had been so overwhelming. But these days the pain was still 
there, and growing, if anything, worse. Chance, a congenital weakness, was 
proving to be her footbinder. Adventure's end, Allie thought; betrayed by my 
feet. The image of footbinding stayed with her. 
_Goddamn Chinese_, she mused, echoing Wilson's ghost. 
"Life is so easy for some people," she had wept into Gibreel Farishta's arms. 
"Why don't _their_ blasted feet give out?" He had kissed her forehead. "For 
you, it may always be a struggle," he said. "You want it too damn much." 
The class was waiting for her, growing impatient with all this talk of 
phantoms. They wanted _the_ story, her story. They wanted to stand on the 
mountain-top. _Do you know how it feels_, she wanted to ask them, _to 
have the whole of your life concentrated into one moment, a few hours long? 
Do you know what it's like when the only direction is down?_ "I was in the 
second pair with Sherpa Pemba," she said. "The weather was perfect, 
perfect. So clear you felt you could look right through the sky into whatever 



lay beyond. The first pair must have reached the summit by now, I said to 
Pemba. Conditions are holding and we can go. Pemba grew very serious, 
quite a change, because he was one of the expedition clowns. He had never 
been to the summit before, either. At that stage I had no plans to go without 
oxygen, but when I saw that Pemba intended it, I thought, okay, me too. It 
was a stupid whim, unprofessional, really, but I suddenly wanted to be a 
woman sitting on top of that bastard mountain, a human being, not a 
breathing machine. Pemba said, Allie Bibi, don't do, but I just started up. In 
a while we passed the others coming down and I could see the wonderful 
thing in their eyes. They were so high, possessed of such an exaltation, that 
they didn't even notice I wasn't wearing the oxygen equipment. Be careful, 
they shouted over to us, Look out for the angels. Pemba had fallen into a 
good breathing pattern and I fell into step with it, breathing in with his in, 
out with his out. I could feel something lifting off the top of my head and I 
was grinning, just grinning from ear to ear, and when Pemba looked my way 
I could see he was doing the same. It looked like a grimace, like pain, but it 
was just foolish joy." She was a woman who had been brought to 
transcendence, to the miracles of the soul, by the hard physical labour of 
hauling herself up an icebound height of rock. "At that moment," she told 
the girls, who were climbing beside her every step of the way, "I believed it 
all: that the universe has a sound, that you can lift a veil and see the face of 
God, everything. I saw the Himalayas stretching below me and that was 
God's face, too. Pemba must have seen something in my expression that 
bothered him because he called across, Look out, Allie Bibi, the height. I 
recall sort of floating over the last overhang and up to the top, and then we 
were there, with the ground falling away on every side. Such light; the 
universe purified into light. I wanted to tear off my clothes and let it soak 
into my skin." Not a titter from the class; they were dancing naked with her 
on the roof of the world. "Then the visions began, the rainbows looping and 
dancing in the sky, the radiance pouring down like a waterfall from the sun, 
and there were angels, the others hadn't been joking. I saw them and so did 
Sherpa Pemba. We were on our knees by then. His pupils looked pure white 
and so did mine, I'm sure. We would probably have died there, I'm sure, 
snow-blind and mountain-foolish, but then I heard a noise, a loud, sharp 
report, like a gun. That snapped me out of it. I had to yell at Pern until he, 
too, shook himself and we started down. The weather was changing rapidly; 
a blizzard was on the way. The air was heavy now, heaviness instead of that 
light, that lightness. We just made it to the meeting point and the four of us 
piled into the little tent at Camp Six, twenty-seven thousand feet. You don't 
talk much up there. We all had our Everests to re-climb, over and over, all 
night. But at some point I asked: "What was that noise? Did anyone fire a 
gun?" They looked at me as if I was touched. Who'd do such a damnfool 
thing at this altitude, they said, and anyway, Allie, you know damn well 
there isn't a gun anywhere on the mountain. They were right, of course, but 



I heard it, I know that much: wham bam, shot and echo. That's it," she 
ended abruptly. "The end. Story of my life." She picked up a silver-headed 
cane and prepared to depart. The teacher, Mrs. Bury, came forward to utter 
the usual platitudes. But the girls were not to be denied. "So what was it, 
then, Al lie?" they insisted; and she, looking suddenly ten years older than 
her thirty-three, shrugged. "Can't say," she told them. "Maybe it was 
Maurice Wilson's ghost." 

She left the classroom, leaning heavily on her stick. 

ooo 

The city -- Proper London, yaar, no bloody less! -- was dressed in white, like 
a mourner at a funeral. -- Whose bloody funeral, mister, Gibreel Farishta 
asked himself wildly, not mine, I bloody hope and trust. When the train 
pulled into Victoria station he plunged out without waiting for it to come to a 
complete halt, turned his ankle and went sprawling beneath the baggage 
trolleys and sneers of the waiting Londoners, clinging, as he fell, on to his 
increasingly battered hat. Rekha Merchant was nowhere to be seen, and 
seizing the moment Gibreel ran through the scattering crowd like a man 
possessed, only to find her by the ticket barrier, floating patiently on her 
carpet, invisible to all eyes but his own, three feet off the ground. 
"What do you want," he burst out, "what's your business with me?" "To 
watch you fall," she instantly replied. "Look around," she added, "I've 
already made you look like a pretty big fool." 

People were clearing a space around Gibreel, the wild man in an outsize 
overcoat and trampy hat, _that man's talking to himself_, a child's voice 
said, and its mother answered _shh, dear, it's wicked to mock the afflicted_. 
Welcome to London. Gibreel Farishta rushed towards the stairs leading down 
towards the Tube. Rekha on her carpet let him go. 
But when he arrived in a great rush at the northbound platform of the 
Victoria Line he saw her again. This time she was a colour photograph in a 
48--sheet advertising poster on the wall across the track, advertising the 
merits of the international direct — dialling system. _Send your voice on a 
magic-carpet ride to India_, she advised. _No djinns or lamps required_. He 
gave a loud cry, once again causing his fellow-travellers to doubt his sanity, 
and fled over to the southbound platform, where a train was just pulling in. 
He leapt aboard, and there was Rekha Merchant facing him with her carpet 
rolled up and lying across her knees. The doors closed behind him with a 
bang. 

That day Gibreel Farishta fled in every direction around the Underground of 
the city of London and Rekha Merchant found him wherever he went; she 
sat beside him on the endless up-escalator at Oxford Circus and in the 
tightly packed elevators of Tufnell Park she rubbed up against him from 
behind in a manner that she would have thought quite outrageous during 
her lifetime. On the outer reaches of the Metropolitan Line she hurled the 
phantoms of her children from the tops of claw--like trees, and when he 



came up for air outside the Bank of England she flung herself histrionically 
from the apex of its neo-classical pediment. And even though he did not 
have any idea of the true shape of that most protean and chameleon of 
cities he grew convinced that it kept changing shape as he ran around 
beneath it, so that the stations on the Underground changed lines and 
followed one another in apparently random sequence. More than once he 
emerged, suffocating, from that subterranean world in which the laws of 
space and time had ceased to operate, and tried to hail a taxi; not one was 
willing to stop, however, so he was obliged to plunge back into that hellish 
maze, that labyrinth without a solution, and continue his epic flight. At last, 
exhausted beyond hope, he surrendered to the fatal logic of his insanity and 
got out arbitrarily at what he conceded must be the last, meaningless station 
of his prolonged and futile journey in search of the chimera of renewal. He 
came out into the heartbreaking indifference of a litter-blown street by a 
lorry—infested roundabout. Darkness had already fallen as he walked 
unsteadily, using the last reserves of his optimism, into an unknown park 
made spectral by the ectoplasmic quality of the tungsten lamps. As he sank 
to his knees in the isolation of the winter night he saw the figure of a woman 
moving slowly towards him across the snow-shrouded grass, and surmised 
that it must be his nemesis, Rekha Merchant, coming to deliver her death- 
kiss, to drag him down into a deeper underworld than the one in which she 
had broken his wounded spirit. He no longer cared, and by the time the 
woman reached him he had fallen forward on to his forearms, his coat 
dangling loosely about him and giving him the look of a large, dying beetle 
who was wearing, for obscure reasons, a dirty grey trilby hat. 
As if from a great distance he heard a shocked cry escape the woman's lips, 
a gasp in which disbelief, joy and a strange resentment were all mixed up, 
and just before his senses left him he understood that Rekha had permitted 
him, for the time being, to reach the illusion of a safe haven, so that her 
triumph over him could be the sweeter when it came at the last. 
"You're alive," the woman said, repeating the first words she had ever 
spoken to his face. "You got your life back. That's the point., 
Smiling, he fell asleep at Allie's flat feet in the falling snow. 



IV Ayesha 



Even the serial visions have migrated now; they know the city better than he. 
And in the aftermath of Rosa and Rekha the dream-worlds of his archangelic 
other self begin to seem as tangible as the shifting realities he inhabits while 
he's awake. This, for instance, has started coming: a mansion block built in 
the Dutch style in a part of London which he will subsequently identify as 
Kensington, to which the dream flies him at high speed past Barkers 
department store and the small grey house with double bay windows where 
Thackeray wrote _Vanity Fair_ and the square with the convent where the 
little girls in uniform are always going in, but never come out, and the house 
where Talleyrand lived in his old age when after a thousand and one 
chameleon changes of allegiance and principle he took on the outward form 
of the French ambassador to London, and arrives at a seven--storey corner 
block with green wrought—iron balconies up to the fourth, and now the 
dream rushes him up the outer wall of the house and on the fourth floor it 
pushes aside the heavy curtains at the living-room window and finally there 
he sits, unsleeping as usual, eyes wide in the dim yellow light, staring into 
the future, the bearded and turbaned Imam. 

Who is he? An exile. Which must not be confused with, allowed to run into, 
all the other words that people throw around: emigre, expatriate, refugee, 
immigrant, silence, cunning. Exile is a dream of glorious return. Exile is a 
vision of revolution: Elba, not St Helena. It is an endless paradox: looking 
forward by always looking back. The exile is a ball hurled high into the air. 
He hangs there, frozen in time, translated into a photograph; denied motion, 
suspended impossibly above his native earth, he awaits the inevitable 
moment at which the photograph must begin to move, and the earth reclaim 
its own. These are the things the Imam thinks. His home is a rented flat. It 
is a waiting-- room, a photograph, air. 

The thick wallpaper, olive stripes on a cream ground, has faded a little, 
enough to emphasize the brighter rectangles and ovals that indicate where 
pictures used to hang. The Imam is the enemy of images. When he moved 
in the pictures slid noiselessly from the walls and slunk from the room, 
removing themselves from the rage of his unspoken disapproval. Some 
representations, however, are permitted to remain. On the mantelpiece he 
keeps a small group of postcards bearing conventional images of his 
homeland, which he calls simply Desh: a mountain looming over a city; a 
picturesque village scene beneath a mighty tree; a mosque. But in his 
bedroom, on the wall facing the hard cot where he lies, there hangs a more 
potent icon, the portrait of a woman of exceptional force, famous for her 
profile of a Grecian statue and the black hair that is as long as she is high. A 
powerful woman, his enemy, his other: he keeps her close. Just as, far away 
in the palaces of her omnipotence she will be clutching his portrait beneath 



her royal cloak or hiding it in a locket at her throat. She is the Empress, and 
her name is -- what else? -- Ayesha. On this island, the exiled Imam, and at 
home in Desh, She. They plot each other's deaths. 

The curtains, thick golden velvet, are kept shut all day, because otherwise 
the evil thing might creep into the apartment: foreignness, Abroad, the alien 
nation. The harsh fact that he is here and not There, upon which all his 
thoughts are fixed. On those rare occasions when the Imam goes out to take 
the Kensington air, at the centre of a square formed by eight young men in 
sunglasses and bulging suits, he folds his hands before him and fixes his 
gaze upon them, so that no element or particle of this hated city, -- this sink 
of iniquities which humiliates him by giving him sanctuary, so that he must 
be beholden to it in spite of the lustfulness, greed and vanity of its ways, — 
can lodge itself, like a dust--speck, in his eyes. When he leaves this loathed 
exile to return in triumph to that other city beneath the postcard-mountain, 
it will be a point of pride to be able to say that he remained in complete 
ignorance of the Sodom in which he had been obliged to wait; ignorant, and 
therefore unsullied, unaltered, pure. 

And another reason for the drawn curtains is that of course there are eyes 
and ears around him, not all of them friendly. The orange buildings are not 
neutral. Somewhere across the street there will be zoom lenses, video 
equipment, jumbo mikes; and always the risk of snipers. Above and below 
and beside the Imam are the safe apartments occupied by his guards, who 
stroll the Kensington streets disguised as women in shrouds and silvery 
beaks; but it is as well to be too careful. Paranoia, for the exile, is a 
prerequisite of survival. 

A fable, which he heard from one of his favourites, the American convert, 
formerly a successful singer, now known as Bilal X. In a certain nightclub to 
which the Imam is in the habit of sending his lieutenants to listen in to 
certain other persons belonging to certain opposed factions, Bilal met a 
young man from Desh, also a singer of sorts, so they fell to talking. It turned 
out that this Mahmood was a badly scared individual. He had recently 
_shacked up_ with a gori, a long red woman with a big figure, and then it 
turned out that the previous lover of his beloved Renata was the exiled boss 
of the S A V A K torture organization of the Shah of Iran. The number one 
Grand Panjandrum himself, not some minor sadist with a talent for 
extracting toenails or setting fire to eyelids, but the great haramzada in 
person. The day after Mahmood and Renata moved in to their new 
apartment a letter arrived for Mahmood. _Okay, shit-eater, you're fucking 
my woman, I just wanted to say hello_. The next day a second letter arrived. 
_By the way, prick, I forgot to mention, here is your new telephone 
number_. At that point Mahmood and Renata had asked for an exdirectory 
listing but had not as yet been given their new number by the telephone 
company. When it came through two days later and was exactly the same as 
the one on the letter, Mahmood's hair fell out all at once. Then, seeing it 



lying on the pillow, he joined his hands together in front of Renata and 
begged, "Baby, I love you, but you're too hot for me, please go somewhere, 
far far." When the Imam was told this story he shook his head and said, that 
whore, who will touch her now, in spite of her lustcreating body? She put a 
stain on herself worse than leprosy; thus do human beings mutilate 
themselves. But the true moral of the fable was the need for eternal 
vigilance. London was a city in which the ex-boss of S A V A K had great 
connections in the telephone company and the Shah's ex-chef ran a thriving 
restaurant in Hounslow. Such a welcoming city, such a refuge, they take all 
types. Keep the curtains drawn. 

Floors three to five of this block of mansion flats are, for the moment, all the 
homeland the Imam possesses. Here there are rifles and short-wave radios 
and rooms in which the sharp young men in suits sit and speak urgently into 
several telephones. There is no alcohol here, nor are playing cards or dice 
anywhere in evidence, and the only woman is the one hanging on the old 
man's bedroom wall. In this surrogate homeland, which the insomniac saint 
thinks of as his waiting-room or transit lounge, the central heating is at full 
blast night and day, and the windows are tightly shut. The exile cannot 
forget, and must therefore simulate, the dry heat of Desh, the once and 
future land where even the moon is hot and dripping like a fresh, buttered 
chapati. O that longed-for part of the world where the sun and moon are 
male but their hot sweet light is named with female names. At night the 
exile parts his curtains and the alien moonlight sidles into the room, its 
coldness striking his eyeballs like a nail. He winces, narrows his eyes. Loose- 
robed, frowning, ominous, awake: this is the Imam. 
Exile is a soulless country. In exile, the furniture is ugly, expensive, all 
bought at the same time in the same store and in too much of a hurry: shiny 
silver sofas with fins like old Buicks DeSotos Oldsmobiles, glass-fronted 
bookcases containing not books but clippings files. In exile the shower goes 
scalding hot whenever anybody turns on a kitchen tap, so that when the 
Imam goes to bathe his entire retinue must remember not to fill a kettle or 
rinse a dirty plate, and when the Imam goes to the toilet his disciples leap 
scalded from the shower. In exile no food is ever cooked; the dark- 
spectacled bodyguards go out for takeaway. In exile all attempts to put 
down roots look like treason: they are admissions of defeat. 
The Imam is the centre of a wheel. 

Movement radiates from him, around the clock. His son, Khalid, enters his 
sanctum bearing a glass of water, holding it in his right hand with his left 
palm under the glass. The Imam drinks water constantly, one glass every 
five minutes, to keep himself clean; the water itself is cleansed of impurities, 
before he sips, in an American filtration machine. All the young men 
surrounding him are well aware of his famous Monograph on Water, whose 
purity, the Imam believes, communicates itself to the drinker, its thinness 
and simplicity, the ascetic pleasures of its taste. "The Empress," he points 



out, "drinks wine." Burgundies, clarets, hocks mingle their intoxicating 
corruptions within that body both fair and foul. The sin is enough to 
condemn her for all time without hope of redemption. The picture on his 
bedroom wall shows the Empress Ayesha holding, in both hands, a human 
skull filled with a dark red fluid. The Empress drinks blood, but the Imam is 
a water man. "Not for nothing do the peoples of our hot lands offer it 
reverence," the Monograph proclaims. "Water, preserver of life. No civilized 
individual can refuse it to another. A grandmother, be her limbs ever so 
arthritically stiff, will rise at once and go to the tap if a small child should 
come to her and ask, pani, nani. Beware all those who blaspheme against it. 
Who pollutes it, dilutes his soul." 

The Imam has often vented his rage upon the memory of the late Aga Khan, 
as a result of being shown the text of an interview in which the head of the 
Ismailis was observed drinking vintage champagne. _0, sir, this champagne 
is only for outward show. The instant it touches my lips, it turns to water_. 
Fiend, the Imam is wont to thunder. Apostate, blasphemer, fraud. When the 
future comes such individuals will be judged, he tells his men. Water will 
have its day and blood will flow like wine. Such is the miraculous nature of 
the future of exiles: what is first uttered in the impotence of an overheated 
apartment becomes the fate of nations. Who has not dreamed this dream, of 
being a king for a day? -- But the Imam dreams of more than a day; feels, 
emanating from his fingertips, the arachnid strings with which he will control 
the movement of history. 
No: not history. 
His is a stranger dream. 

ooo 

His son, water-carrying Khalid, bows before his father like a pilgrim at a 
shrine, informs him that the guard on duty outside the sanctum is Salman 
Farsi. Bilal is at the radio transmitter, broadcasting the day's message, on 
the agreed frequency, to Desh. 

The Imam is a massive stillness, an immobility. He is living stone. His great 
gnarled hands, granite--grey, rest heavily on the wings of his high-backed 
chair. His head, looking too large for the body beneath, lolls ponderously on 
the surprisingly scrawny neck that can be glimpsed through the grey-black 
wisps of beard. The Imam's eyes are clouded; his lips do not move. He is 
pure force, an elemental being; he moves without motion, acts without 
doing, speaks without uttering a sound. He is the conjurer and history is his 
trick. 

No, not history: something stranger. 

The explanation of this conundrum is to be heard, at this very moment, on 
certain surreptitious radio waves, on which the voice of the American 
convert Bilal is singing the Imam's holy song. Bilal the muezzin: his voice 
enters a ham radio in Kensington and emerges in dreamed-of Desh, 
transmuted into the thunderous speech of the Imam himself. Beginning with 



ritual abuse of the Empress, with lists of her crimes, murders, bribes, sexual 
relations with lizards, and so on, he proceeds eventually to issue in ringing 
tones the Imam's nightly call to his people to rise up against the evil of her 
State. "We will make a revolution," the Imam proclaims through him, "that 
is a revolt not only against a tyrant, but against history." For there is an 
enemy beyond Ayesha, and it is History herself. History is the blood— wine 
that must no longer be drunk. History the intoxicant, the creation and 
possession of the Devil, of the great Shaitan, the greatest of the lies -- 
progress, science, rights -- against which the Imam has set his face. History 
is a deviation from the Path, knowledge is a delusion, because the sum of 
knowledge was complete on the day AILah finished his revelation to 
Mahound. "We will unmake the veil of history," Bilal declaims into the 
listening night, "and when it is unravelled, we will see Paradise standing 
there, in all its glory and light." The Imam chose Bilal for this task on 
account of the beauty of his voice, which in its previous incarnation 
succeeded in climbing the Everest of the hit parade, not once but a dozen 
times, to the very top. The voice is rich and authoritative, a voice in the 
habit of being listened to; well—nourished, highly trained, the voice of 
American confidence, a weapon of the West turned against its makers, 
whose might upholds the Empress and her tyranny. In the early days Bilal X 
protested at such a description of his voice. He, too, belonged to an 
oppressed people, he insisted, so that it was unjust to equate him with the 
Yankee imperialists. The Imam answered, not without gentleness: Bilal, your 
suffering is ours as well. But to be raised in the house of power is to learn its 
ways, to soak them up, through that very skin that is the cause of your 
oppression. The habit of power, its timbre, its posture, its way of being with 
others. It is a disease, Bilal, infecting all who come too near it. If the 
powerful trample over you, you are infected by the soles of their feet. 
Bilal continues to address the darkness. "Death to the tyranny of the 
Empress Ayesha, of calendars, of America, of time! We seek the eternity, 
the timelessness, of God. His still waters, not her flowing wines." Burn the 
books and trust the Book; shred the papers and hear the Word, as it was 
revealed by the Angel Gibreel to the Messenger Mahound and explicated by 
your interpreter and Imam. "Ameen," Bilal said, concluding the night's 
proceedings. While, in his sanctum, the Imam sends a message of his own: 
and summons, conjures up, the archangel, Gibreel. 

ooo 

He sees himself in the dream: no angel to look at, just a man in his ordinary 
street clothes, Henry Diamond's posthumous handme-downs: gabardine and 
trilby over outsize trousers held up by braces, a fisherman's woollen pullover, 
billowy white shirt. This dream-Gibreel, so like the waking one, stands 
quaking in the sanctum of the Imam, whose 



eyes are white as clouds. 

Gibreel speaks querulously, to hide his fear. 

"Why insist on archangels? Those days, you should know, are gone." 
The Imam closes his eyes, sighs. The carpet extrudes long hairy tendrils, 
which wrap themselves around Gibreel, holding him fast. 
"You don't need me," Gibreel emphasizes. "The revelation is complete. Let 
me go." 

The other shakes his head, and speaks, except that his lips do not move, 
and it is Bilal's voice that fills Gibreel's ears, even though the broadcaster is 
nowhere to be seen, _tonight's the night_, the voice says, _and you must fly 
me to Jerusalem_. 

Then the apartment dissolves and they are standing on the roof beside the 
water—tank, because the Imam, when he wishes to move, can remain still 
and move the world around him. His beard is blowing in the wind. It is 
longer now; if it were not for the wind that catches at it as if it were a 
flowing chiffon scarf, it would touch the ground by his feet; he has red eyes, 
and his voice hangs around him in the sky. Take me. Gibreel argues, Seems 
you can do it easily by yourself: but the Imam, in a single movement of 
astonishing rapidity, slings his beard over his shoulder, hoists up his skirts to 
reveal two spindly legs with an almost monstrous covering of hair, and leaps 
high into the night air, twirls himself about, and settles on Gibreel's 
shoulders, clutching on to him with fingernails that have grown into long, 
curved claws. Gibreel feels himself rising into the sky, bearing the old man 
of the sea, the Imam with hair that grows longer by the minute, streaming 
in every direction, his eyebrows like pennants in the wind. 
Jerusalem, he wonders, which way is that? -- And then, it's a slippery word, 
Jerusalem, it can be an idea as well as a place: a goal, an exaltation. Where 
is the Imam's Jerusalem? "The fall of the harlot," the disembodied voice 
resounds in his ears. "Her crash, the Babylonian whore." 
They zoom through the night. The moon is heating up, beginning to bubble 
like cheese under a grill; he, Gibreel, sees pieces of it falling off from time to 
time, moon-drips that hiss and bubble on the sizzling griddle of the sky. 
Land appears below them. The heat grows intense. 
It is an immense landscape, reddish, with flat-topped trees. They fly over 
mountains that are also flat-topped; even the stones, here, are flattened by 
the heat. Then they come to a high mountain of almost perfectly conical 
dimensions, a mountain that also sits postcarded on a mantelpiece far away; 
and in the shadow of the mountain, a city, sprawling at its feet like a 
supplicant, and on the mountain's lower slopes, a palace, the palace, her 
place: the Empress, whom radio messages have unmade. This is a 
revolution of radio hams. 

Gibreel, with the Imam riding him like a carpet, swoops lower, and in the 
steaming night it looks as if the streets are alive, they seem to be writhing, 
like snakes; while in front of the palace of the Empress's defeat a new hill 



seems to be growing, _while we watch, baba, what's going on here?_ The 
Imam's voice hangs in the sky: "Come down. I will show you Love." 
They are at rooftop— level when Gibreel realizes that the streets are 
swarming with people. Human beings, packed so densely into those snaking 
paths that they have blended into a larger, composite entity, relentless, 
serpentine. The people move slowly, at an even pace, down alleys into lanes, 
down lanes into side streets, down side streets into highways, all of them 
converging upon the grand avenue, twelve lanes wide and lined with giant 
eucalyptus trees, that leads to the palace gates. The avenue is packed with 
humanity; it is the central organ of the new, manyheaded being. Seventy 
abreast, the people walk gravely towards the Empress's gates. In front of 
which her household guards are waiting in three ranks, lying, kneeling and 
standing, with machine-guns at the ready. The people are walking up the 
slope towards the guns; seventy at a time, they come into range; the guns 
babble, and they die, and then the next seventy climb over the bodies of the 
dead, the guns giggle once again, and the hill of the dead grows higher. 
Those behind it commence, in their turn, to climb. In the dark doorways of 
the city there are mothers with covered heads, pushing their beloved sons 
into the parade, _go, be a martyr, do the needful, die_. "You see how they 
love me," says the disembodied voice. "No tyranny on earth can withstand 
the power of this slow, walking love." 

"This isn't love," Gibreel, weeping, replies. "It's hate. She has driven them 
into your arms." The explanation sounds thin, superficial. 
"They love me," the Imam's voice says, "because I am water. I am fertility 
and she is decay. They love me for my habit of smashing clocks. Human 
beings who turn away from God lose love, and certainty, and also the sense 
of His boundless time, that encompasses past, present and future; the 
timeless time, that has no need to move. We long for the eternal, and I am 
eternity. She is nothing: a tick, or tock. She looks in her mirror every day 
and is terrorized by the idea of age, of time passing. Thus she is the prisoner 
of her own nature; she, too, is in the chains of Time. After the revolution 
there will be no clocks; we'll smash the lot. The word _clock_ will be 
expunged from our dictionaries. After the revolution there will be no 
birthdays. We shall all be born again, all of us the same unchanging age in 
the eye of Almighty God." 

He falls silent, now, because below us the great moment has come: the 
people have reached the guns. Which are silenced in their turn, as the 
endless serpent of the people, the gigantic python of the risen masses, 
embraces the guards, suffocating them, and silences the lethal chuckling of 
their weapons. The Imam sighs heavily. "Done." 

The lights of the palace are extinguished as the people walk towards it, at 
the same measured pace as before. Then, from within the darkened palace, 
there rises a hideous sound, beginning as a high, thin, piercing wail, then 
deepening into a howl, an ululation loud enough to fill every cranny of the 



city with its rage. Then the golden dome of the palace bursts open like an 
egg, and rising from it, glowing with blackness, is a mythological apparition 
with vast black wings, her hair streaming loose, as long and black as the 
Imam's is long and white: Al— Lat, Gibreel understands, bursting out of 
Ayesha's shell. 

"Kill her," the Imam commands. 

Gibreel sets him down on the palace's ceremonial balcony, his arms 
outstretched to encompass the joy of the people, a sound that drowns even 
the howls of the goddess and rises up like a song. And then he is being 
propelled into the air, having no option, he is a marionette going to war; and 
she, seeing him coming, turns, crouches in air, and, moaning dreadfully, 
comes at him with all her might. Gibreel understands that the Imam, 
fighting by proxy as usual, will sacrifice him as readily as he did the hill of 
corpses at the palace gate, that he is a suicide soldier in the service of the 
cleric's cause. I am weak, he thinks, I am no match for her, but she, too, 
has been weakened by her defeat. The Imam's strength moves Gibreel, 
places thunderbolts in his hands, and the battle is joined; he hurls lightning 
spears into her feet and she plunges comets into his groin, _we are killing 
each other_, he thinks, _we will die and there will be two new constellations 
in space: Al-Lat, and Gibreel_. Like exhausted warriors on a corpse-- littered 
field, they totter and slash. Both are failing fast. 
She falls. 

Down she tumbles, Al-Lat queen of the night; crashes upsidedown to earth, 
crushing her head to bits; and lies, a headless black angel, with her wings 
ripped off, by a little wicket gate in the palace gardens, all in a crumpled 
heap. -- And Gibreel, looking away from her in horror, sees the Imam grown 
monstrous, lying in the palace forecourt with his mouth yawning open at the 
gates; as the people march through the gates he swallows them whole. 
The body of Al-Lat has shrivelled on the grass, leaving behind only a dark 
stain; and now every clock in the capital city of Desh begins to chime, and 
goes on unceasingly, beyond twelve, beyond twenty-four, beyond one 
thousand and one, announcing the end of Time, the hour that is beyond 
measuring, the hour of the exile's return, of the victory of water over wine, 
of the commencement of the Untimc of the Imam. 

ooo 

When the nocturnal story changes, when, without warning, the progress of 
events injahilia and Yathrib gives way to the struggle of Imam and Empress, 
Gibreel briefly hopes that the curse has ended, that his dreams have been 
restored to the random eccentricity of ordinary life; but then, as the new 
story, too, falls into the old pattern, continuing each time he drops off from 
the precise point at which it was interrupted, and as his own image, 
translated into an avatar of the archangel, re-enters the frame, so his hope 
dies, and he succumbs once more to the inexorable. Things have reached 
the point at which some of his night-sagas seem 



more bearable than others, and after the apocalypse of the Imam he feels 
almost pleased when the next narrative begins, extending his internal 
repertory, because at least it suggests that the deity whom he, Gibreel, has 
tried unsuccessfully to kill can be a God of love, as well as one of vengeance, 
power, duty, rules and hate; and it is, too, a nostalgic sort of tale, of a lost 
homeland; it feels like a return to the past . . . what story is, this? Coming 
right up. To begin at the beginning: On the morning of his fortieth birthday, 
in a room full of butterflies, Mirza Saeed Akhtar watched his sleeping wife. 

ooo 

On the fateful morning of his fortieth birthday, in a room full of butterflies, 
the zamindar Mirza Saeed Akhtar watched over his sleeping wife, and felt his 
heart fill up to the bursting-point with love. He had awoken early for once, 
rising before dawn with a bad dream souring his mouth, his recurring dream 
of the end of the world, in which the catastrophe was invariably his fault. He 
had been reading Nietzsche the night before -- "the pitiless end of that small, 
overextended species called Man" -- and had fallen asleep with the book 
resting face downwards on his chest. Waking to the rustle of butterfly wings 
in the cool, shadowy bedroom, he was angry with himself for being so 
foolish in his choice of bedside reading matter. He was, however, wide 
awake now. Getting up quietly, he slipped his feet into chappals and strolled 
idly along the verandas of the great mansion, still in darkness on account of 
their lowered blinds, and the butterflies bobbed like courtiers at his back. In 
the far distance, someone was playing a flute. Mirza Saeed drew up the chick 
blinds and fastened their cords. The gardens were deep in mist, through 
which the butterfly clouds were swirling, one mist intersecting another. This 
remote region had always been renowned for its lepidoptera, for these 
miraculous squadrons that filled the air by day and night, butterflies with the 
gift of chameleons, whose wings changed colour as they settled on vermilion 
flowers, ochre curtains, obsidian goblets or amber finger-rings. In the 
zamindar's mansion, and also in the nearby village, the miracle of the 
butterflies had become so familiar as to seem mundane, but in fact they had 
only returned nineteen years ago, as the servant women would recall. They 
had been the familiar spirits, or so the legend ran, of a local saint, the holy 
woman known only as Bibiji, who had lived to the age of two hundred and 
forty-two and whose grave, until its location was forgotten, had the property 
of curing impotence and warts. Since the death of Bibiji one hundred and 
twenty years ago the butterflies had vanished into the same realm of the 
legendary as Bibiji herself, so that when they came back exactly one 
hundred and one years after their departure it looked, at first, like an omen 
of some imminent, wonderful thing. After Bibiji's death -- it should quickly 
be said — the village had continued to prosper, the potato crops remained 
plentiful, but there had been a gap in many hearts, even though the 
villagers of the present had no memory of the time of the old saint. So the 
return of the butterflies lifted many spirits, but when the expected wonders 



failed to materialize the locals sank back, little by little, into the insufficiency 
of the day-to-day. The name of the zamindar's mansion, _Peristan_, may 
have had its origins in the magical creatures' fairy wings, and the village's 
name, _Titlipur_, certainly did. But names, once they are in common use, 
quickly become mere sounds, their etymology being buried, like so many of 
the earth's marvels, beneath the dust of habit. The human inhabitants of 
Titlipur, and its butterfly hordes, moved amongst one another with a kind of 
mutual disdain. The villagers and the zamindar's family had long ago 
abandoned the attempt to exclude the butterflies from their homes, so that 
now whenever a trunk was opened, a batch of wings would fly out of it like 
Pandora's imps, changing colour as they rose; there were butterflies under 
the closed lids of the thunderboxes in the toilets of Peristan, and inside 
every wardrobe, and between the pages of books. When you awoke you 
found the butterflies sleeping on your cheeks. 

The commonplace eventually becomes invisible, and Mirza Saeed had not 
really noticed the butterflies for a number of years. On the morning of his 
fortieth birthday, however, as the first light of dawn touched the house and 
the butterflies began instantly to glow, the beauty of the moment took his 
breath away. He ran at once to the bedroom in the zenana wing in which his 
wife Mishal lay sleeping, veiled in a mosquito—net. The magic butterflies 
were resting on her exposed toes, and a mosquito had evidently found its 
way inside as well, because there was a line of little bites along the raised 
edge of her collar— bone. He wanted to lift the net, crawl inside and kiss the 
bites until they faded away. How inflamed they looked! How, when she 
awoke, they would itch! But he held himself back, preferring to enjoy the 
innocence of her sleeping form. She had soft, red-brown hair, white white 
skin, and her eyes, behind the closed lids, were silky grey. Her father was a 
director of the state bank, so it had been an irresistible match, an arranged 
marriage which restored the fortunes of the Mirza's ancient, decaying family 
and then ripened, overtime and in spite of their failure to have children, into 
a union of real love. Full of emotion, Mirza Saeed watched Mishal sleep and 
chased the last shreds of his nightmare from his mind. "How can the world 
be done for," he reasoned contentedly to himself, "if it can offer up such 
instances of perfection as this lovely dawn?" 

Continuing down the line of these happy thoughts, he formulated a silent 
speech to his resting wife. "Mishal, I'm forty years old and as contented as a 
forty-day babe. I see now that I've been falling deeper and deeper into our 
love over the years, and now I swim, like some fish, in that warm sea." How 
much she gave him, he marvelled; how much he needed her! Their marriage 
transcended mere sensuality, was so intimate that a separation was 
unthinkable. "Growing old beside you," he told her while she slept, "will be, 
Mishal, a privilege." He permitted himself the sentimentality of blowing a 
kiss in her direction and then tiptoeing from the room. Out once more on the 
main veranda of his private quarters on the mansion's upper storey, he 



glanced across to the gardens, which were coming into view as the dawn 
lifted the mist, and saw the sight that would destroy his peace of mind 
forever, smashing it beyond hope of repair at the very instant in which he 
had become certain of its invulnerability to the ravages of fate. 
A young woman was squatting on the lawn, holding out her left palm. 
Butterflies were settling on this surface while, with her right hand, she 
picked them up and put them in her mouth. Slowly, methodically, she 
breakfasted on the acquiescent wings. 

Her lips, cheeks, chin were heavily stained by the many different colours 
that had rubbed off the dying butterflies. 

When Mirza Saeed Akhtar saw the young woman eating her gossamer 
breakfast on his lawn, he felt a surge of lust so powerful that he instantly 
felt ashamed. "It's impossible," he scolded himself, "I am not an animal, 
after all." The young woman wore a saffron yellow sari wrapped around her 
nakedness, after the fashion of the poor women of that region, and as she 
stooped over the butterflies the sari, hanging loosely forwards, bared her 
small breasts to the gaze of the transfixed zamindar. Mirza Saeed stretched 
out his hands to grip the balcony railing, and the slight movement of his 
white kurta must have caught her eye, because she lifted her head quickly 
and looked right into his face. 

And did not immediately look down again. Nor did she get up and run away, 
as he had half expected. 

What she did: waited for a few seconds, as though to see if he intended to 
speak. When he did not, she simply resumed her strange meal without 
taking her eyes from his face. The strangest aspect of it was that the 
butterflies seemed to be funnelling downwards from the brightening air, 
going willingly towards her outstretched palms and their own deaths. She 
held them by the wingtips, threw her head back and flicked them into her 
mouth with the tip of her narrow tongue. Once she kept her mouth open, the 
dark lips parted defiantly, and Mirza Saeed trembled to see the butterfly 
fluttering within the dark cavern of its death, yet making no attempt to 
escape. When she was satisfied that he had seen this, she brought her lips 
together and began to chew. They remained thus, peasant woman below, 
landowner above, until her eyes unexpectedly rolled upwards in their sockets 
and she fell heavily, twitching violently, on to her left side. 
After a few seconds of transfixed panic, the Mirza shouted, "Ohe, house! Ohe, 
wake up, emergency!" At the same time he ran towards the stately 
mahogany staircase from England, brought here from some unimaginable 
Warwickshire, some fantastic location in which, in a damp and lightless 
priory, King Charles I had ascended these same steps, before losing his head, 
in the seventeenth century of another system of time. Down these stairs 
hurtled Mirza Saeed Akhtar, last of his line, trampling over the ghostly 
impressions of beheaded feet as he sped towards the lawn. 



The girl was having convulsions, crushing butterflies beneath her rolling, 
kicking body. Mirza Saeed got to her first, although the servants and Mishal, 
awakened by his cry, were not far behind. He grasped the girl by the jaw 
and forced it open, inserting a nearby twig, which she at once bit in half. 
Blood trickled from her cut mouth, and he feared for her tongue, but the 
sickness left her just then, she became calm, and slept. Mishal had her 
carried to her own bedroom, and now Mirza Saeed was obliged to gaze on a 
second sleeping beauty in that bed, and was stricken for a second time by 
what seemed too rich and deep a sensation to be called by the crude name, 
_lust_. He found that he was at once sickened by his own impure designs 
and also elated by the feelings that were coursing within him, fresh feelings 
whose newness excited him greatly. Mishal came to stand beside her 
husband. "Do you know her?" Saeed asked, and she nodded. "An orphan girl. 
She makes small enamel animals and sells them at the trunk road. She has 
had the falling sickness since she was very little." Mirza Saeed was awed, 
not for the first time, by his wife's gift of involvement with other human 
beings. He himself could hardly recognize more than a handful of the 
villagers, but she knew each person's pet names, family histories and 
incomes. They even told her their dreams, although few of them dreamed 
more than once a month on account of being too poor to afford such luxuries. 
The overflowing fondness he had felt at dawn returned, and he placed his 
arm around her shoulders. She leaned her head against him and said softly: 
"Happy birthday." He kissed the top of her hair. They stood embracing, 
watching the sleeping girl. Ayesha: his wife told him the name. 

ooo 

After the orphan girl Ayesha arrived at puberty and became, on account of 
her distracted beauty and her air of staring into another world, the object of 
many young men's desires, it began to be said that she was looking for a 
lover from heaven, because she thought herself too good for mortal men. 
Her rejected suitors complained that in practical terms she had no business 
acting so choosy, in the first place because she was an orphan, and in the 
second, because she was possessed by the demon of epilepsy, who would 
certainly put off any heavenly spirits who might otherwise have been 
interested. Some embittered youths went so far as to suggest that as 
Ayesha's defects would prevent her from ever finding a husband she might 
as well start taking lovers, so as not to waste that beauty, which ought in all 
fairness to have been given to a less problematic individual. In spite of these 
attempts by the young men of Titlipur to turn her into their whore, Ayesha 
remained chaste, her defence being a look of such fierce concentration on 
patches of air immediately above people's left shoulders that it was regularly 
mistaken for contempt. Then people heard about her new habit of 
swallowing butterflies and they revised their opinion of her, convinced that 
she was touched in the head and therefore dangerous to lie with in case the 
demons crossed over into her lovers. After this the lustful males of her 



village left her alone in her hovel, alone with her toy animals and her 
peculiar fluttering diet. One young man, however, took to sitting a little 
distance from her doorway, facing discreetly in the opposite direction, as if 
he were on guard, even though she no longer had any need of protectors. 
He was a former untouchable from the neighbouring village of Chatnapatna 
who had been converted to Islam and taken the name of Osman. Ayesha 
never acknowledged Osman's presence, nor did he ask for such 
acknowledgement. The leafy branches of the village waved over their heads 
in the breeze. 

The village of Titlipur had grown up in the shade of an immense ban yan-- 
tree, a single monarch that ruled, with its multiple roots, over an area more 
than half a mile in diameter. By now the growth of tree into village and 
village into tree had become so intricate that it was impossible to 
differentiate between the two. Certain districts of the tree had become well- 
known lovers' nooks; others were chicken runs. Some of the poorer 
labourers had constructed rough-and-ready shelters in the angles of stout 
branches, and actually lived inside the dense foliage. There were branches 
that were used as pathways across the village, and children's swings made 
out of the old tree's beards, and in places where the tree stooped low down 
towards the earth its leaves formed roofs for many a hutment that seemed 
to hang from the greenery like the nest of a weaver bird. When the village 
panchayat assembled, it sat on the mightiest branch of all. The villagers had 
grown accustomed to referring to the tree by the name of the village, and to 
the village simply as "the tree". The banyan's non-human inhabitants -- 
honey ants, squirrels, owls -- were accorded the respect due to fellow- 
citizens. Only the butterflies were ignored, like hopes long since shown to be 
false. 

It was a Muslim village, which was why the convert Osman had come here 
with his clown's outfit and his "boom-boom" bullock after he had embraced 
the faith in an act of desperation, hoping that changing to a Muslim name 
would do him more good than earlier re-namings, for example when 
untouchables were renamed "children of God". As a child of God in 
Chatnapatna he had not been permitted to draw water from the town well, 
because the touch of an outcaste would have polluted the drinking water. . 
Landless and, like Ayesha, an orphan, Osman earned his living as a clown. 
His bullock wore bright red paper cones over its horns and much tinselly 
drapery over its nose and back. He went from village to village performing 
an act, at marriages and other celebrations, in which the bullock was his 
essential partner and foil, nodding in answer to his questions, one nod for no, 
twice for yes. 

"Isn't this a nice village we've come to?" Osman would ask. 



Boom, the bullock disagreed. 

"It isn't? Oh yes it is. Look: aren't the people good?" 
Boom. 

"What? Then it's a village full of sinners?" 
Boom, boom. 

"Baapu-re! Then, will everybody go to hell?" 
Boom, boom. 

"But, bhaijan. Is there any hope for them?" 

Boom, boom, the bullock offered salvation. Excitedly, Osman bent down, 
placing his ear by the bullock's mouth. "Tell, quickly. What should they do to 
be saved?" At this point the bullock plucked Osman's cap off his head and 
carried it around the crowd, asking for money, and Osman would nod, 
happily: Boom, boom. 

Osman the convert and his boom-boom bullock were well liked in Titlipur, 
but the young man only wanted the approval of one person, and she would 
not give it. He had admitted to her that his conversion to Islam had been 
largely tactical, "Just so I could get a drink, bibi, what's a man to do?" She 
had been outraged by his confession, informed him that he was no Muslim at 
all, his soul was in peril and he could go back to Chatnapatna and die of 
thirst for all she cared. Her face coloured, as she spoke, with an 
unaccountably strong disappointment in him, and it was the vehemence of 
this disappointment that gave him the optimism to remain squatting a dozen 
paces from her home, day after day, but she continued to stalk past him, 
nose in air, without so much as a good morning or hope-you"re-well. 
Once a week, the potato carts of Titlipur trundled down the rutted, narrow, 
four-hour track to Chatnapatna, which stood at the point at which the track 
met the grand trunk road. In Chatnapatna stood the high, gleaming 
aluminium silos of the potato wholesalers, but this had nothing to do with 
Ayesha's regular visits to the town. She would hitch a ride on a potato cart, 
clutching a little sackcloth bundle, to take her toys to market. Chatnapatna 
was known throughout the region for its kiddies' knick-knacks, carved 
wooden toys and enamelled figurines. Osman and his bullock stood at the 
edge of the banyan-tree, watching her bounce about on top of the potato 
sacks until she had diminished to a dot. 

In Chatnapatna she made her way to the premises of Sri Srinivas, owner of 
the biggest toy factory in town. On its walls were the political graffiti of the 
day: _Vote for Hand_. Or, more politely: _Please to vote for CP (M)_. Above 
these exhortations was the proud announcement: _Srinivas's Toy Univas. 
Our Moto: Sinceriety & Creativity_. Srinivas was inside: a large jelly of a 
man, his head a hairless sun, a fiftyish fellow whom a lifetime of selling toys 
had failed to sour. Ayesha owed him her livelihood. He had been so taken 
with the artistry of her whittling that he had agreed to buy as many as she 
could produce. But in spite of his habitual bonhomie his expression darkened 
when Ayesha undid her bundle to show him two dozen figures of a young 



man in a clown hat, accompanied by a decorated bullock that could dip its 
tinselled head. Understanding that Ayesha had forgiven Osman his 
conversion, Sri Srinivas cried, "That man is a traitor to his birth, as you well 
know. What kind of a person will change gods as easily as his dhotis? God 
knows what got into you, daughter, but I don't want these dolls." On the 
wall behind his desk hung a framed certificate which read, in elaborately cur- 
- licued print: _This is to certify that MR SRI S. SRINIVAS is an Expert on 
the Geological History of the Planet Earth, having flown through Grand 
Canyon with SCENIC AIRLINES_. Srinivas closed his eyes and folded his 
arms, an unlaughing Buddha with the indisputable authority of one who had 
flown. "That boy is a devil," he said with finality, and Ayesha folded the dolls 
into her piece of sackcloth and turned to leave, without arguing. Srinivas's 
eyes flew open. "Damn you," he shouted, "aren't you going to give me a 
hard time? You think I don't know you need the money? Why you did such a 
damn stupid thing? What are you going to do now? just go and make some 
FP dolls, double quick, and I will buy at best rate plus, because I am 
generous to a fault." Mr. Srinivas's personal invention was the Family 
Planning doll, a socially responsible variant of the old Russian--doll notion. 
Inside a suited-and-booted Abba-doll was a demure, sari-clad Amma, and 
inside her a daughter containing a son. Two children are plenty: that was the 
message of the dolls. "Make quickly quickly," Srinivas called after the 
departing Ayesha. "FP dolls have high turnover." 

Ayesha turned, and smiled. "Don't worry about me, Srinivasji," she said, and 
left. 

Ayesha the orphan was nineteen years old when she began her walk back to 
Titlipur along the rutted potato track, but by the time she turned up in her 
village some forty—eight hours later she had attained a kind of agelessness, 
because her hair had turned as white as snow while her skin had regained 
the luminous perfection of a new-born child's, and although she was 
completely naked the butterflies had settled upon her body in such thick 
swarms that she seemed to be wearing a dress of the most delicate material 
in the universe. The clown Osman was practising routines with the boom- 
boom bullock near the track, because even though he had been worried sick 
by her extended absence, and had spent the whole of the previous night 
searching for her, it was still necessary to earn a living. When he laid eyes 
on her, that young man who had never respected God because ofhaving 
been born untouchable was filled with holy terror, and did not dare to 
approach the girl with whom he was so helplessly in love. 
She went into her hut and slept for a day and a night without waking up. 
Then she went to see the village headman, Sarpanch Muhammad Din, and 
informed him matter-of-factly that the Archangel Gibreel had appeared to 
her in a vision and had lain down beside her to rest. "Greatness has come 
among us," she informed the alarmed Sarpanch, who had until then been 



more concerned with potato quotas than transcendence. "Everything will be 
required of us, and everything will be given to us also." 
In another part of the tree, the Sarpanch's wife Khadija was consoling a 
weeping clown, who was finding it hard to accept that he had lost his 
beloved Ayesha to a higher being, for when an archangel lies with a woman 
she is lost to men forever. Khadija was old and forgetful and frequently 
clumsy when she tried to be loving, and she gave Osman cold comfort: "The 
sun always sets when there is fear of tigers," she quoted the old saying: bad 
news always comes all at once. 

Soon after the story of the miracle got out, the girl Ayesha was summoned 
to the big house, and in the following days she spent long hours closeted 
with the zamindar's wife, Begum Mishal Akhtar, whose mother had also 
arrived on a visit, and fallen for the archangel's white—haired wife. 

ooo 

The dreamer, dreaming, wants (but is unable) to protest: I never laid a 
finger on her, what do you think this is, some kind of wet dream or what? 
Damn me if I know from where that girl was getting her 
information/inspiration. Not from this quarter, that's for sure. 
This happened: she was walking back to her village, but then she seemed to 
grow weary all of a sudden, and went off the path to lie in the shade of a 
tamarind—tree and rest. The moment her eyes closed he was there beside 
her, dreaming Gibreel in coat and hat, sweltering in the heat. She looked at 
him but he couldn't say what she saw, wings maybe, haloes, the works. 
Then he was lying there and finding he could not get up, his limbs had 
become heavier than iron bars, it seemed as if his body might be crushed by 
its own weight into the earth. When she finished looking at him she nodded, 
gravely, as if he had spoken, and then she took off her scrap of a sari and 
stretched out beside him, nude. Then in the dream he fell asleep, out cold as 
if somebody pulled out the plug, and when dreamed himself awake again 
she was standing in front of him with that loose white hair and the 
butterflies clothing her: transformed. She was still nodding, with a rapt 
expression on her face, receiving a message from somewhere that she called 
Gibreel. Then she left him lying there and returned to the village to make 
her entrance. 

So now I have a dream-wife, the dreamer becomes conscious enough to 
think. What the hell to do with her? -- But it isn't up to him. Ayesha and 
Mishal Akhtar are together in the big house. 

ooo 

Ever since his birthday Mirza Saeed had been full of passionate desires, "as 
if life really does begin at forty", his wife marvelled. Their marriage became 
so energetic that the servants had to change the bedsheets three times per 
day. Mishal hoped secretly that this heightening of her husband's libido 
would lead her to conceive, because she was of the firm opinion that 
enthusiasm mattered, whatever doctors might say to the contrary, and that 



the years of taking her temperature every morning before getting out of bed, 
and then plotting the results on graph paper in order to establish her pattern 
of ovulation, had actually dissuaded the babies from being born, partly 
because it was difficult to be properly ardent when science got into bed 
along with you, and partly, too, in her view, because no self—respecting 
foetus would wish to enter the womb of so mechanically programmed a 
mother; Mishal still prayed for a child, although she no longer mentioned the 
fact to Saeed so as to spare him the sense of having failed her in this 
respect. Eyes shut, feigning sleep, she would call on God for a sign, and 
when Saeed became so loving, so frequently, she wondered if maybe this 
might not be it. As a result, his strange request that from now on, whenever 
they came to stay at Periscan, she should adopt the "old ways" and retreat 
into purdah, was not treated by her with the contempt it deserved. In the 
city, where they kept a large and hospitable house, the zamindar and his 
wife were known as one of the most "modern" and "go--go" couples on the 
scene; they collected contemporary art and threw wild parties and invited 
friends round for fumbles in the dark on sofas while watching soft-porno 
VCRs. So when Mirza Saeed said, "Would it not be sort of delicious, Mishu, if 
we tailored our behaviour to fit this old house," she should have laughed in 
his face. Instead she replied, "What you like, Saeed," because he gave her 
to understand that it was a sort of erotic game. He even hinted that his 
passion for her had become so overwhelming that he might need to express 
it at any moment, and if she were out in the open at the time it might 
embarrass the staff; certainly her presence would make it impossible for him 
to concentrate on any of his tasks, and besides, in the city, "we will still be 
completely up-to-date". From this she understood that the city was full of 
distractions for the Mirza, so that her chances of conceiving were greatest 
right here in Titlipur. She resolved to stay put. This was when she invited 
her mother to come and stay, because if she were to confine herself to the 
zenana she would need company. Mrs. Qureishi arrived wobbling with plump 
fury, determined to scold her son-in-law until he gave up this purdah 
foolishness, but Mishal amazed her mother by begging: "Please don't." Mrs. 
Qureishi, the wife of the state bank director, was quite a sophisticate herself. 
"In fact, all your teenage, Mishu, you were the grey goose and I was the 
hipster. I thought you dragged yourself out of that ditch but I see he pushed 
you back in there again." The financier's wife had always been of the opinion 
that her son-in— law was a secret cheapskate, an opinion which had survived 
intact in spite of being starved of any scrap of supporting evidence. Ignoring 
her daughter's veto, she sought out Mirza Saeed in the formal garden and 
launched into him, wobbling, as was her wont, for emphasis. "What type 



of life are you living?" she demanded. "My daughter is not for locking up, but 
for taking out! What is all your fortune for, if you keep it also under lock and 
key? My son, unlock both wallet and wife! Take her away, renew your love, 
on some enjoyable _outing!_" Mirza Saeed opened his mouth, found no 
reply, shut it again. Dazzled by her own oratory, which had given rise, quite 
on the spur of the moment, to the idea of a holiday, Mrs. Qureishi warmed 
to her theme. "Just get set, and go!" she urged. "Go, man, go! Go away with 
her, or will you lock her up until she goes away," -- here she jabbed an 
ominous finger at the sky -- "_forever?_" 
Guiltily, Mirza Saeed promised to consider the idea. 

"What are you waiting for?" she cried in triumph. "You big softo? You .. . you 
_Hamlet?_" 

His mother-in-law's attack brought on one of the periodic bouts of self- 
reproach which had been plaguing Mirza Saeed ever since he persuaded 
Mishal to take the veil. To console himself he settled down to read Tagore's 
story _Ghare-Baire_ in which a zamindar persuades his wife to come out of 
purdah, whereupon she takes up with a firebrand politico involved in the 
"swadeshi" campaign, and the zamindar winds up dead. The novel cheered 
him up momentarily, but then his suspicions returned. Had he been sincere 
in the reasons he gave his wife, or was he simply finding a way of leaving 
the coast clear for his pursuit of the madonna of the butterflies, the epileptic, 
Ayesha? "Some coast," he thought, remembering Mrs. Qureishi with her 
eyes of an accusative hawk, "some clear." His mother-in-law's presence, he 
argued to himself, was further proof of his bona fides. Had he not positively 
encouraged Mishal to send for her, even though he knew perfectly well that 
the old fatty couldn't stand him and would suspect him of every damn 
slyness under the sun? "Would I have been so keen for her to come if I was 
planning on hanky panky?" he asked himself. But the nagging inner voices 
continued: "All this recent sexology, this renewed interest in your lady wife, 
is simple transference. Really, you are longing for your peasant floozy to 
come and flooze with you." 

Guilt had the effect of making the zamindar feel entirely worthless. His 
mother— in— law's insults came to seem, in his unhappiness, like the literal 
truth. "Softo," she called him, and sitting in his study, surrounded by 
bookcases in which worms were munching contentedly upon priceless 
Sanskrit texts such as were not to be found even in the national archives, 
and also, less upliftingly, on the complete works of Percy Westerman, G. A. 
Henty and Dornford Yates, Mirza Saeed admitted, yes, spot on, I am soft. 
The house was seven generations old and for seven generations the 
softening had been going on. He walked down the corridor in which his 
ancestors hung in baleful, gilded frames, and contemplated the mirror which 
he kept hanging in the last space as a reminder that one day he, too, must 
step up on to this wall. He was a man without sharp corners or rough edges; 
even his elbows were covered by little pads of flesh. In the mirror he saw 



the thin moustache, the weak chin, the lips stained by paan. Cheeks, nose, 
forehead: all soft, soft, soft. "Who would see anything in a type like me?" he 
cried, and when he realized that he had been so agitated that he had spoken 
aloud he knew he must be in love, that he was sick as a dog with love, and 
that the object of his affections was no longer his loving wife. 
"Then what a damn, shallow, tricksy and self-deceiving fellow I am," he 
sighed to himself, "to change so much, so fast. I deserve to be finished off 
without ceremony." But he was not the type to fall on his sword. Instead, he 
strolled a while around the corridors of Peristan, and pretty soon the house 
worked its magic and restored him to something like a good mood once 
again. 

The house: in spite of its faery name, it was a solid, rather prosy building, 
rendered exotic only by being in the wrong country. It had been built seven 
generations ago by a certain Perowne, an English architect much favoured 
by the colonial authorities, whose only style was that of the neo-classical 
English country house. In those days the great zamindars were crazy for 
European architecture. Saeed's great--great--great— great— grand-father had 
hired the fellow five minutes after meeting him at the Viceroy's reception, to 
indicate publicly that not all Indian Muslims had supported the action of the 
Meerut soldiers or been in sympathy with the subsequent uprisings, no, not 
by any means; -- and then given him carte blanche; -- so here Peristan now 
stood, in the middle of near-tropical potato fields and beside the great 
banyan-tree, covered in bougainvillaea creeper, with snakes in the kitchens 
and butterfly skeletons in the cupboards. Some said its name owed more to 
the Englishman's than to anything more fanciful: it was a mere contraction 
of _Perownistan_. 

After seven generations it was at last beginning to look as if it belonged in 
this landscape of bullock carts and palm-trees and high, clear, star—heavy 
skies. Even the stained— glass window looking down on the staircase of King 
Charles the Headless had been, in an indefinable manner, naturalized. Very 
few of these old zamindar houses had survived the egalitarian depredations 
of the present, and accordingly there hung over Peristan something of the 
musty air of a museum, even though -- or perhaps because -- Mirza Saeed 
took great pride in the old place and had spent lavishly to keep it in trim. He 
slept under a high canopy of worked and beaten brass in a ship-like bed that 
had been occupied by three Viceroys. In the grand salon he liked to sit with 
Mishal and Mrs. Qureishi in the unusual three-way love seat. At one end of 
this room a colossal Shiraz carpet stood rolled up, on wooden blocks, 
awaiting the glamorous reception which would merit its unfurling, and which 
never came. In the dining-room there were stout classical columns with 
ornate Corinthian tops, and there were peacocks, both real and stone, 
strolling on the main steps to the house, and Venetian chandeliers tinkling in 
the hail. The original punkahs were still in full working order, all their 
operating cords travelling by way of pulleys and holes in walls and floors to a 



little, airless boot-room where the punkah-wallah sat and tugged the lot 
together, trapped in the irony of the foetid air of that tiny windowless room 
while he despatched cool breezes to all other parts of the house. The 
servants, too, went back seven generations and had therefore lost the art of 
complaining. The old ways ruled: even the Titlipur sweet-vendor was 
required to seek the zamindar's approval before commencing to sell any 
innovative sweetmeat he might have invented. Life in Peristan was as soft as 
it was hard under the tree; but, even into such cushioned existences, heavy 
blows can fall. 

ooo 

The discovery that his wife was spending most of her time closeted with 
Ayesha filled the Mirza with an insupportable irritation, an eczema of the 
spirit that maddened him because there was no way of scratching it. Mishal 
was hoping that the archangel, Ayesha's husband, would grant her a baby, 
but because she couldn't tell that to her husband she grew sullen and 
shrugged petulantly when he asked her why she wasted so much time with 
the village's craziest girl. Mishal's new reticence worsened the itch in Mirza 
Saeed's heart, and made him jealous, too, although he wasn't sure if he was 
jealous of Ayesha, or Mishal. He noticed for the first time that the mistress 
of the butterflies had eyes of the same lustrous grey shade as his wife, and 
for some reason this made him cross, too, as if it proved that the women 
were ganging up on him, whispering God knew what secrets; maybe they 
were chittcring and chattering about him! This zenana business seemed to 
have backfired; even that old jelly Mrs. Qureishi had been taken in by 
Ayesha. Quite a threesome, thought Mirza Saeed; when mumbo-jumbo gets 
in through your door, good sense leaves by the window. 
As for Ayesha: when she encountered the Mirza on the balcony, or in the 
garden as he wandered reading Urdu love-poetry, she was invariably 
deferential and shy; but her good behaviour, coupled with the total absence 
of any spark of erotic interest, drove Saeed further and further into the 
helplessness of his despair. So it was that when, one day, he spied Ayesha 
entering his wife's quarters and heard, a few minutes later, his mother-in- 
law's voice rise in a melodramatic shriek, he was seized by a mood of mulish 
vengefulness and deliberately waited a full three minutes before going to 
investigate. He found Mrs. Qureishi tearing her hair and sobbing like a movie 
queen, while Mishal and Ayesha sat cross-legged on the bed, facing each 
other, grey eyes staring into grey, and Mishal's face was cradled between 
Ayesha's outstretched palms. 

It turned out that the archangel had informed Ayesha that the zamindar's 
wife was dying of cancer, that her breasts were full of the malign nodules of 
death, and that she had no more than a few months to live. The location of 
the cancer had proved to Mishal the cruelty of God, because only a vicious 
deity would place death in the breast of a woman whose only dream was to 
suckle new life. When Saeed entered, Ayesha had been whispering urgently 



to Mishal: "You mustn't think that way. God will save you. This is a test of 
faith." 

Mrs. Qureishi told Mirza Saeed the bad news with many shrieks and howls, 
and for the confused zamindar it was the last straw. He flew into a temper 
and started yelling loudly and trembling as if he might at any moment start 
smashing up the furniture in the room and its occupants as well. 
"To hell with your spook cancer," he screamed at Ayesha in his exasperation. 
"You have come into my house with your craziness and angels and dripped 
poison into my family's ears. Get out of here with your visions and your 
invisible spouse. This is the modern world, and it is medical doctors and not 
ghosts in potato fields who tell us when we are ill. You have created this 
bloody hullabaloo for nothing. Get out and never come on to my land again." 
Ayesha heard him out without removing her eyes or hands from Mishal. 
When Saeed stopped for breath, clenching and unclenching his fists, she said 
softly to his wife: "Everything will be required of us, and everything will be 
given." When he heard this formula, which people all over the village were 
beginning to parrot as if they knew what it meant, Mirza Saeed Akhtar went 
briefly out of his mind, raised his hand and knocked Ayesha senseless. She 
fell to the floor, bleeding from the mouth, a tooth loosened by his fist, and 
as she lay there Mrs. Qureishi hurled abuse at her son-in-law. "O God, I 
have put my daughter in the care of a killer. O God, a woman hitter. Go on, 
hit me also, get some practice. Defiler of saints, blasphemer, devil, unclean." 
Saeed left the room without saying a word. 

The next day Mishal Akhtar insisted on returning to the city for a complete 
medical check-up. Saeed took a stand. "If you want to indulge in 
superstition, go, but don't expect me to come along. It's eight hours' drive 
each way; so, to hell with it." Mishal left that afternoon with her mother and 
the driver, and as a result Mirza Saeed was not where he should have been, 
that is, at his wife's side, when the results of the tests were communicated 
to her: positive, inoperable, too far advanced, the claws of the cancer dug in 
deeply throughout her chest. A few months, six if she was lucky, and before 
that, coming soon, the pain. Mishal returned to Peristan and went straight to 
her rooms in the zenana, where she wrote her husband a formal note on 
lavender stationery, telling him of the doctor's diagnosis. When he read her 
death sentence, written in her own hand, he wanted very badly to burst into 
tears, but his eyes remained obstinately dry. He had had no time for the 
Supreme Being for many years, but now a couple of Aycsha's phrases 
popped back into his mind. _God will save you. Everything will be given_. A 
bitter, superstitious notion occurred to him: "It is a curse," he thought. 
"Because I lusted after Ayesha, she has murdered my wife." 
When he went to the zenana, Mishal refused to see him, but her mother, 
barring the doorway, handed Saeed a second note on scented blue 
notepaper. "I want to see Ayesha," it read. "Kindly permit this." Bowing his 
head, Mirza Saeed gave his assent, and crept away in shame. 



0 0 0 

With Mahound, there is always a struggle; with the Imam, slavery; but with 
this girl, there is nothing. Gibreel is inert, usually asleep in the dream as he 
is in life. She comes upon him under a tree, or in a ditch, hears what he isn't 
saying, takes what she needs, and leaves. What does he know about cancer, 
for example? Not a solitary thing. 

All around him, he thinks as he half--dreams, half-wakes, are people hearing 
voices, being seduced by words. But not his; never his original material. -- 
Then whose? Who is whispering in their ears, enabling them to move 
mountains, halt clocks, diagnose disease? 
He can't work it out. 

ooo 

The day after Mishal Akhtar's return to Titlipur, the girl Ayesha, whom 
people were beginning to call a kahin, a pir, disappeared completely for a 
week. Her hapless admirer, Osman the clown, who had been following her at 
a distance along the dusty potato track to Chatnapatna, told the villagers 
that a breeze got up and blew dust into his eyes; when he got it out again 
she had "just gone". Usually, when Osman and his bullock started telling 
their tall tales about djinnis and magic lamps and open—sesames, the 
villagers looked tolerant and teased him, okay, Osman, save it for those 
idiots in Chatnapatna; they may fall for that stuff but here in Titlipur we 
know which way is up and that palaces do not appear unless a thousand and 
one labourers build them, nor do they disappear unless the same workers 
knock them down. On this occasion, however, nobody laughed at the clown, 
because where Ayesha was concerned the villagers were willing to believe 
anything. They had grown convinced that the snow-haired girl was the true 
successor to old Bibiji, because had the butterflies not reappeared in the 
year of her birth, and did they not follow her around like a cloak? Ayesha 
was the vindication of the longsoured hope engendered by the butterflies' 
return, and the evidence that great things were still possible in this life, even 
for the weakest and poorest in the land. 

"The angel has taken her away," marvelled the Sarpanch's wife Khadija, and 
Osman burst into tears. "But no, it is a wonderful thing," old Khadija 
uncomprehendingly explained. The villagers teased the Sarpanch: "How you 
got to be village headman with such a tactless spouse, beats us." 
"You chose me," he dourly replied. 

On the seventh day after her disappearance Ayesha was sighted walking 
towards the village, naked again and dressed in golden butterflies, her silver 
hair streaming behind her in the breeze. She went directly to the home of 
Sarpanch Muhammad Din and asked that the Titlipur panchayat be convened 
for an immediate emergency meeting. "The greatest event in the history of 
the tree has come upon us," she confided. Muhammad Din, unable to refuse 
her, fixed the time of the meeting for that evening, after dark. 



That night the panchayat members took their places on the usual branch of 
the tree, while Ayesha the kahin stood before them on the ground. "I have 
flown with the angel into the highest heights," she said. "Yes, even to the 
lote— tree of the uttermost end. The archangel, Gibreel: he has brought us a 
message which is also a command. Everything is required of us, and 
everything will be given." 

Nothing in the life of the Sarpanch Muhammad Din had prepared him for the 
choice he was about to face. "What does the angel ask, Ayesha, daughter?" 
he asked, fighting to steady his voice. 

"It is the angel's will that all of us, every man, and woman and child in the 
village, begin at once to prepare for a pilgrimage. We are commanded to 
walk from this place to Mecca Sharif, to kiss the Black Stone in the Ka"aba at 
the centre of the Haram Sharif, the sacred mosque. There we must surely 

go." 

Now the panchayat's quintet began to debate heatedly. There were the 
crops to consider, and the impossibility of abandoning their homes en masse. 
"It is not to be conceived of, child," the Sarpanch told her. "It is well known 
that Allah excuses haj and umra to those who are genuinely unable to go for 
reasons of poverty or health." But Ayesha remained silent and the elders 
continued to argue. Then it was as if her silence infected everyone else and 
for a long moment, in which the question was settled -- although by what 
means nobody ever managed to comprehend -- there were no words spoken 
at all. 

It was Osman the clown who spoke up at last, Osman the convert, for whom 
his new faith had been no more than a drink of water. "It's almost two 
hundred miles from here to the sea," he cried. "There are old ladies here, 
and babies. However can we go?" 

"God will give us the strength," Ayesha serenely replied. 
"Hasn't it occurred to you," Osman shouted, refusing to give up, "that 
there's a mighty ocean between us and Mecca Sharif? How will we ever cross? 
We have no money for the pilgrim boats. Maybe the angel will grow us wings, 
so we can fly?" 

Many villagers rounded angrily upon the blasphemer Osman. "Be quiet now," 
Sarpanch Muhammad Din rebuked him. "You haven't been long in our faith 
or our village. Keep your trap shut and learn our ways." 
Osman, however, answered cheekily, "So this is how you welcome new 
settlers. Not as equals, but as people who must do as they are told." A knot 
of red— faced men began to tighten around Osman, but before anything else 
could happen the kahin Ayesha changed the mood entirely by answering the 
clown's questions. 

"This, too, the angel has explained," she said quietly. "We will walk two 
hundred miles, and when we reach the shores of the sea, we will put our 
feet into the foam, and the waters will open for us. The waves shall be 
parted, and we shall walk across the ocean-floor to Mecca." 



0 0 0 

The next morning Mirza Saced Akhtar awoke in a house that had fallen 
unusually silent, and when he called for the servants there was no reply. The 
stillness had spread into the potato fields, too; but under the broad, 
spreading roof of the Titlipur tree all was hustle and bustle. The panchayat 
had voted unanimously to obey the command of the Archangel Gibreel, and 
the villagers had begun to prepare for departure. At first the Sarpanch had 
wanted the carpenter Isa to construct litters that could be pulled by oxen 
and on which the old and infirm could ride, but that idea had been knocked 
on the head by his own wife, who told him, "You don't listen, Sarpanch 
sahibji! Didn't the angel say we must walk? Well then, that is what we must 
do." Only the youngest of infants were to be excused the foot-pilgrimage, 
and they would be carried (it had been decided) on the backs of all the 
adults, in rotation. The villagers had pooled all their resources, and heaps of 
potatoes, lentils, rice, bitter gourds, chillies, aubergines and other 
vegetables were piling up next to the panchayat bough. The weight of the 
provisions was to be evenly divided between the walkers. Cooking utensils, 
too, were being gathered together, and whatever bedding could be found. 
Beasts of burden were to be taken, and a couple of carts carrying live 
chickens and such, but in general the pilgrims were under the Sarpanch's 
instructions to keep personal belongings to a minimum. Preparations had 
been under way since before dawn, so that by the time an incensed Mirza 
Saeed strode into the village, things were well advanced. For forty-five 
minutes the zamindar slowed things up by making angry speeches and 
shaking individual villagers by the shoulders, but then, fortunately, he gave 
up and left, so that the work could be continued at its former, rapid pace. As 
the Mirza departed he smacked his head repeatedly and called people names, 
such as Joonies, simpletons_, very bad words, but he had always been a 
godless man, the weak end of a strong line, and he had to be left to find his 
own fate; there was no arguing with men like him. 
By sunset the villagers were ready to depart, and the Sarpanch told 
everyone to rise for prayers in the small hours so that they could leave 
immediately afterwards and thus avoid the worst heat of the day. That night, 
lying down on his mat beside old Khadija, he murmured, "At last. I've 
always wanted to see the Ka"aba, to circle it before I die." She reached out 
from her mat to take his hand. "I, too, have hoped for it, against hope," she 
said. "We'll walk through the waters together." 

Mirza Saeed, driven into an impotent frenzy by the spectacle of the packing 
village, burst in on his wife without ceremony. "You should see what's going 
on, Mishu," he exclaimed, gesticulating absurdly. "The whole of Titlipur has 
taken leave of its brains, and is off to the seaside. What is to happen to their 
homes, their fields? There is ruination in store. Must be political agitators 
involved. Someone has been bribing someone. — Do you think if I offered 



cash they would stay here like sane persons?" His voice dried. Ayesha was in 
the room. 

"You bitch," he cursed her. She was sitting cross—legged on the bed while 
Mishal and her mother squatted on the floor, sorting through their 
belongings and working out how little they could manage with on the 
pilgrimage. 

"You're not going," Mirza Saeed ranted."! forbid it, the devil alone knows 
what germ this whore has infected the villagers with, but you are my wife 
and I refuse to let you embark upon this suicidal venture." 
"Good words," Mishal laughed bitterly. "Saeed, good choice of words. You 
know I can't live but you talk about suicide. Saeed, a thing is happening 
here, and you with your imported European atheism don't know what it is. 
Or maybe you would if you looked beneath your English suitings and tried to 
locate your heart." 

"It's incredible," Saeed cried. "Mishal, Mishu, is this you? All of a sudden 

you've turned into this God-bothered type from ancient history?" 

Mrs. Qureishi said, "Go away, son. No room for unbelievers here. The angel 

has told Ayesha that when Mishal completes the pilgrimage to Mecca her 

cancer will have disappeared. Everything is required and everything will be 

given." 

Mirza Saeed Akhtar put his palms against a wall of his wife's bedroom and 
pressed his forehead against the plaster. After a long pause he said: "If it is 
a question of performing umra then for God's sake let's go to town and catch 
a plane. We can be in Mecca within a couple of days." 
Mishal answered, "We are commanded to walk." 

Saeed lost control of himself. "Mishal? Mishal?" he shrieked. "Commanded? 
Archangels, Mishu? _Gibreel?_ God with a long beard and angels with wings? 
Heaven and hell, Mishal? The Devil with a pointy tail and cloven hoofs? How 
far are you going with this? Do women have souls, what do you say? Or the 
other way: do souls have gender? Is God black or white? When the waters of 
the ocean part, where will the extra water go? Will it stand up sideways like 
walls? Mishal? Answer me. Are there miracles? Do you believe in Paradise? 
Will I be forgiven my sins?" He began to cry, and fell on to his knees, with 
his forehead still pressed against the wall. His dying wife came up and 
embraced him from behind. "Go with the pilgrimage, then," he said, dully. 
"But at least take the Mercedes station wagon. It's got air-conditioning and 
you can take the icebox full of Cokes." 

"No," she said, gently. "We'll go like everybody else. We're pilgrims, Saeed. 
This isn't a picnic at the beach." 

"I don't know what to do," Mirza Saeed Akhtar wept. "Mishu, I can't handle 
this by myself." 

Ayesha spoke from the bed. "Mirza sahib, come with us," she said. "Your 
ideas are finished with. Come and save your soul." 



Saeed stood up, red-eyed. "A bloody outing you wanted," he said viciously 
to Mrs. Qureishi. "That chicken certainly came home to roost. Your outing 
will finish off the lot of us, seven generations, the whole bang shoot." 
Mishal leaned her cheek against his back. "Come with us, Saeed. Just 
come." 

He turned to face Ayesha. "There is no God," he said firmly. 
"There is no God but God, and Muhammad is His Prophet," she replied. 
"The mystical experience is a subjective, not an objective truth," he went on. 
"The waters will not open." 

"The sea will part at the angel's command," Ayesha answered. 
"You are leading these people into certain disaster." 
"I am taking them into the bosom of God." 

"I don't believe in you," Mirza Saeed insisted. "But I'm going to come, and 
will try to end this insanity with every step I take." 
"God chooses many means," Ayesha rejoiced, "many roads by which the 
doubtful may be brought into his certainty." 

"Go to hell," shouted Mirza Saeed Akhtar, and ran, scattering butterflies, 
from the room. 

ooo 

"Who is the madder," Osman the clown whispered into his bullock's ear as 
he groomed it in its small byre, "the madwoman, or the fool who loves the 
madwoman?" The bullock didn't reply. "Maybe we should have stayed 
untouchable," Osman continued. "A compulsory ocean sounds worse than a 
forbidden well." And the bullock nodded, twice for yes, boom, boom. 



V A City Visible but Unseen 



1 

"_Once I'm an owl, what is the spell or antidote for turning me back into 
myself?_" Mr. Muhammad Sufyan, prop. Shaandaar Cafe and landlord of the 
rooming-house above, mentor to the variegated, transient and particoloured 
inhabitants of both, seen-it-all type, least doctrinaire of hajis and most 
unashamed of V C R addicts, ex-schoolteacher, self-taught in classical texts 
of many cultures, dismissed from post in Dhaka owing to cultural differences 
with certain generals in the old days when Bangladesh was merely an East 
Wing, and therefore, in his own words, "not so much an immig as an emig 
runt" -- this last a good-natured allusion to his lack of inches, for though he 
was a wide man, thick of arm and waist, he stood no more than sixtyone 
inches off the ground, blinked in his bedroom doorway, awakened by Jumpy 
Joshi's urgent midnight knock, polished his half--rimmed spectacles on the 
edge of Bengali-style kurta (drawstrings tied at the neck in a neat bow), 
squeezed lids tightly shut open shut over myopic eyes, replaced glasses, 
opened eyes, stroked moustacheless hennaed beard, sucked teeth, and 
responded to the now-indisputable horns on the brow of the shivering fellow 
whom Jumpy, like the cat, appeared to have dragged in, with the above 
impromptu quip, stolen, with commendable mental alacrity for one aroused 
from his slumbers, from Lucius Apuleius of Madaura, Moroccan priest, AD 
120--180 approx., colonial of an earlier Empire, a person who denied the 
accusation of having bewitched a rich widow yet confessed, somewhat 
perversely, that at an early stage in his career he had been transformed, by 
witchcraft, into (not an owl, but) an ass. "Yes, yes," Sufyan continued, 
stepping out into the passage and blowing a white mist of winter breath into 
his cupped hands, "Poor misfortunate, but no point wallowing. Constructive 
attitude must be adopted. I will wake my wife." 

Chamcha was beard-fuzz and grime. He wore a blanket like a toga below 
which there protruded the comic deformity of goats' hoofs, while above it 
could be seen the sad comedy of a sheepskin jacket borrowed from Jumpy, 
its collar turned up, so that sheepish curls nestled only inches from pointy 
billy-goat horns. He seemed incapable of speech, sluggish of body, dull of 
eye; even though Jumpy attempted to encourage him — "There, you see, 
we'll have this well sorted in a flash" -- he, Saladin, remained the most limp 
and passive of -- what? -- let us say: satyrs. Sufyan, meanwhile, offered 
further Apuleian sympathy. "In the case of the ass, reverse metamorphosis 
required personal intervention of goddess Isis," he beamed. "But old times 
are for old fogies. In your instance, young mister, first step would possibly 
be a bowl of good hot soup." 



At this point his kindly tones were quite drowned by the intervention of a 
second voice, raised high in operatic terror; moments after which, his small 
form was being jostled and shoved by the mountainous, fleshy figure of a 
woman, who seemed unable to decide whether to push him out of her way 
or keep him before her as a protective shield. Crouching behind Sufyan, this 
new being extended a trembling arm at whose end was a quivering, pudgy, 
scarlet-nailed index finger. "That over there," she howled. "What thing is 
come upon us?" 

"It is a friend of Joshi's," Sufyan said mildly, and continued, turning to 
Chamcha, "Please forgive, -- the unexpectedness et cet, isn't it? — Anyhow, 
may I present my Mrs; -- my Begum Sahiba, -- Hind." 

"What friend? How friend?" the croucher cried. "Ya Allah, eyes aren't next to 
your nose?" 

The passageway, -- bare-board floor, torn floral paper on the walls, -- was 
starting to fill up with sleepy residents. Prominent among whom were two 
teenage girls, one spike-haired, the other pony-tailed, and both relishing the 
opportunity to demonstrate their skills (learned from Jumpy) in the martial 
arts of karate and Wing Chun: Sufyan's daughters, Mishal (seventeen) and 
fifteenyear-old Anahita, leapt from their bedroom in fighting gear, Bruce Lee 
pajamas worn loosely over T-shirts bearing the image of the new Madonna; 
-- caught sight of unhappy Saladin; -- and shook their heads in wide-eyed 
delight. 

"Radical," said Mishal, approvingly. And her sister nodded assent: "Crucial. 
Fucking A." Her mother did not, however, reproach her for her language; 
Hind's mind was elsewhere, and she wailed louder than ever: "Look at this 
husband of mine. What sort of haji is this? Here is Shaitan himself walking in 
through our door, and I am made to offer him hot chicken yakhni, cooked by 
my own right hand." 

Useless, now, forJumpyJoshi to plead with Hind for tolerance, to attempt 
explanations and demand solidarity. "If he's not the devil on earth," the 
heaving-chested lady pointed out unanswerably, "from where that plague- 
breath comes that he's breathing? From, maybe, the Perfumed Garden?" 
"Not Gulistan, but Bostan," said Chamcha, suddenly. "AI Flight 420." On 
hearing his voice, however, Hind squealed frightfully, and plunged past him, 
heading for the kitchen. 

"Mister," Mishal said to Saladin as her mother fled downstairs, "anyone who 
scares her that way has got to be seriously _bad_." 
"Wicked," Anahita agreed. "Welcome aboard." 

ooo 

This Hind, now so firmly entrenched in exclamatory mode, had once been -- 
strangebuttrue! -- the most blushing of brides, the soul of gentleness, the 
very incarnation of tolerant good humour. As the wife of the erudite 
schoolteacher of Dhaka, she had entered into her duties with a will, the 
perfect helpmeet, bringing her husband cardamom-scented tea when he 



stayed up late marking examination papers, ingratiating herself with the 
school principal at the termly Staff Families Outing, struggling with the 
novels of Bibhutibhushan Banerji and the metaphysics of Tagore in an 
attempt to be more worthy of a spouse who could quote effortlessly from 
Rig--Veda as well as Quran—Sharif, from the military accounts of Julius 
Caesar as well as the Revelations of St John the Divine. In those days she 
had admired his pluralistic openness of mind, and struggled, in her kitchen, 
towards a parallel eclecticism, learning to cook the dosas and uttapams of 
South India as well as the soft meatballs of Kashmir. Gradually her espousal 
of the cause of gastronomic pluralism grew into a grand passion, and while 
secularist Sufyan swallowed the multiple cultures of the subcontinent -- "and 
let us not pretend that Western culture is not present; after these centuries, 
how could it not also be part of our heritage?" -- his wife cooked, and ate in 
increasing quantities, its food. As she devoured the highly spiced dishes of 
Hyderabad and the high-faluting yoghurt sauces of Lucknow her body began 
to alter, because all that food had to find a home somewhere, and she began 
to resemble the wide rolling land mass itself, the subcontinent without 
frontiers, because food passes across any boundary you care to mention. 
Mr. Muhammad Sufyan, however, gained no weight: not a _tola_, not an 
_ounce_. 

His refusal to fatten was the beginning of the trouble. When she reproached 
him -- "You don't like my cooking? For whom I'm doing it all and blowing up 
like a balloon?" -- he answered, mildly, looking up at her (she was the taller 
of the two) over the top of half-rimmed specs: "Restraint is also part of our 
traditions, Begum. Eating two mouthfuls less than one's hunger: self-denial, 
the ascetic path." What a man: all the answers, but you couldn't get him to 
give you a decent fight. 

Restraint was not for Hind. Maybe, if Sufyan had ever complained; if just 
once he'd said, _I thought I was marrying one woman but these days you're 
big enough for two_; if he'd ever given her the incentive! -- then maybe 
she'd have desisted, why not, of course she would; so it was his fault, for 
having no aggression, what kind of a male was it who didn't know how to 
insult his fat lady wife? -- In truth, it was entirely possible that Hind would 
have failed to control her eating binges even if Sufyan had come up with the 
required imprecations and entreaties; but, since he did not, she munched on, 
content to dump the whole blame for her figure on him. 
As a matter of fact, once she had started blaming him for things, she found 
that there were a number of other matters she could hold against him; and 
found, too, her tongue, so that the schoolteacher's humble apartment 
resounded regularly to the kinds of tickings-off he was too much of a mouse 
to hand out to his pupils. Above all, he was berated for his excessively high 
principles, thanks to which, Hind told him, she knew he would never permit 
her to become a rich man's wife; -- for what could one say about a man who, 
finding that his bank had inadvertently credited his salary to his account 



twice in the same month, promptly _drew the institution's notice_ to the 
error and handed back the cash?; -- what hope was there for a teacher who, 
when approached by the wealthiest of the schoolchildren's parents, flatly 
refused to contemplate accepting the usual remunerations in return for 
services rendered when marking the little fellows' examination papers? 
"But all of that I could forgive," she would mutter darkly at him, leaving 
unspoken the rest of the sentence, which was _if it hadn't been for your two 
real offences: your sexual, and political, crimes_. 

Ever since their marriage, the two of them had performed the sexual act 
infrequently, in total darkness, pin-drop silence and almost complete 
immobility. It would not have occurred to Hind to wiggle or wobble, and 
since Sufyan appeared to get through it all with an absolute minimum of 
motion, she took it — had always taken it -- that the two of them were of 
the same mind on this matter, viz., that it was a dirty business, not to be 
discussed before or after, and not to be drawn attention to during, either. 
That the children took their time in coming she took as God's punishment for 
He only knew what misdeeds of her earlier life; that they both turned out to 
be girls she refused to blame on Allah, preferring, instead, to blame the 
weakling seed implanted in her by her unmanly spouse, an attitude she did 
not refrain from expressing, with great emphasis, and to the horror of the 
midwife, at the very moment of little Anahita's birth. "Another girl," she 
gasped in disgust. "Well, considering who made the baby, I should think 
myself lucky it's not a cockroach, or a mouse." After this second daughter 
she told Sufyan that enough was enough, and ordered him to move his bed 
into the hail. He accepted without any argument her refusal to have more 
children; but then she discovered that the lecher thought he could still, from 
time to time, enter her darkened room and enact that strange rite of silence 
and near-motionlessness to which she had only submitted in the name of 
reproduction. "What do you think," he shouted at him the first time he tried 
it, "I do this thing for fun?" 

Once he had got it through his thick skull that she meant business, no more 
hanky-panky, no sir, she was a decent woman, not a lust--crazed libertine, 
he began to stay out late at night. It was during this period -- she had 
thought, mistakenly, that he was visiting prostitutes -- that he became 
involved with politics, and not just any old politics, either, oh no, Mister 
Brainbox had to go and join the devils themselves, the Communist Party, no 
less, so much for those principles of his; demons, that's what they were, 
worse by far than whores. It was because of this dabbling in the occult that 
she had to pack up her bags at such short notice and leave for England with 
two small babies in tow; because of this ideological witchcraft that she had 
had to endure all the privations and humiliations of the process of 
immigration; and on account of this diabolism of his that she was stuck 
forever in this England and would never see her village again. "England," she 
once said to him, "is your revenge upon me for preventing you from 



performing your obscene acts upon my body." He had not given an answer; 
and silence denotes assent. 

And what was it that made them a living in this Vilayet of her exile, this 
Yuke of her sex-obsessed husband's vindictiveness? What? His book learning? 
His _Gitanjali_, _Eclogues_, or that play _Othello_ that he explained was 
really Attallah or Attaullah except the writer couldn't spell, what sort of 
writer was that, anyway? 

It was: her cooking. "Shaandaar," it was praised. "Outstanding, brilliant, 
delicious." People came from all over London to eat her samosas, her 
Bombay chaat, her gulab jamans straight from Paradise. What was there for 
Sufyan to do? Take the money, serve the tea, run from here to there, 
behave like a servant for all his education. O, yes, of course the customers 
liked his personality, he always had an appealing character, but when you're 
running an eatery it isn't the conversation they pay for on the bill. Jalebis, 
barfi, Special of the Day. How life had turned out! She was the mistress now. 
Victory! 

And yet it was also a fact that she, cook and breadwinner, chiefest architect 
of the success of the Shaandaar Cafe, which had finally enabled them to buy 
the whole four-storey building and start renting out its rooms, -- _she_ was 
the one around whom there hung, like bad breath, the miasma of defeat. 
While Sufyan twinkled on, she looked extinguished, like a lightbulb with a 
broken filament, like a fizzled star, like a flame. -- Why? -- Why, when 
Sufyan, who had been deprived of vocation, pupils and respect, bounded 
about like a young lamb, and even began to put on weight, fattening up in 
Proper London as he had never done back home; why, when power had 
been removed from his hands and delivered into hers, did she act -- as her 
husband put it -- the "sad sack", the "glum chum" and the "moochy pooch"? 
Simple: not in spite of, but on account of. Everything she valued had been 
upset by the change; had in this process of translation, been lost. 
Her language: obliged, now, to emit these alien sounds that made her 
tongue feel tired, was she not entitled to moan? Her familiar place: what 
matter that they had lived, in Dhaka, in a teacher's humble flat, and now, 
owing to entrepreneurial good sense, savings and skill with spices, occupied 
this four--storey terraced house? Where now was the city she knew? Where 
the village of her youth and the green waterways of home? The customs 
around which she had built her life were lost, too, or at least were hard to 
find. Nobody in this Vilayet had time for the slow courtesies of life back 
home, or for the many observances of faith. Furthermore: was she not 
forced to put up with a husband of no account, whereas before she could 
bask in his dignified position? Where was the pride in being made to work for 
her living, for his living, whereas before she could sit at home in much- 
befitting pomp? -- And she knew, how could she not, the sadness beneath 
his bonhomie, and that, too, was a defeat; never before had she felt so 
inadequate as a wife, for what kind of a Mrs. is it that cannot cheer up her 



man, but must observe the counterfeit of happiness and make do, as if it 
were the genuine McCoy? -- Plus also: they had come into a demon city in 
which anything could happen, your windows shattered in the middle of the 
night without any cause, you were knocked over in the street by invisible 
hands, in the shops you heard such abuse you felt like your ears would drop 
off but when you turned in the direction of the words you saw only empty air 
and smiling faces, and every day you heard about this boy, that girl, beaten 
up by ghosts. -- Yes, a land of phantom imps, how to explain; best thing 
was to stay home, not go out for so much as to post a letter, stay in, lock 
the door, say your prayers, and the goblins would (maybe) stay away. -- 
Reasons for defeat? Baba, who could count them? Not only was she a 
shopkeeper's wife and a kitchen slave, but even her own people could not be 
relied on; -- there were men she thought of as respectable types, sharif, 
giving telephone divorces to wives back home and running off with some 
haramzadi female, and girls killed for dowry (some things could be brought 
through the foreign customs without duty); -- and worst of all, the poison of 
this devil-island had infected her baby girls, who were growing up refusing 
to speak their mothertongue, even though they understood every word, they 
did it just to hurt; and why else had Mishal cut off all her hair and put 
rainbows into it; and every day it was fight, quarrel, disobey, -- and worst of 
all, there was not one new thing about her complaints, this is how it was for 
women like her, so now she was no longer just one, just herself, just Hind 
wife of teacher Sufyan; she had sunk into the anonymity, the characterless 
plurality, of being merely one-of-the-women--like-her. This was history's 
lesson: nothing for women-like-her to do but suffer, remember, and die. 
What she did: to deny her husband's weakness, she treated him, for the 
most part, like a lord, like a monarch, for in her lost world her glory had lain 
in his; to deny the ghosts outside the cafe, she stayed indoors, sending 
others out for kitchen provisions and household necessities, and also for the 
endless supply of Bengali and Hindi movies on V C R through which (along 
with her ever-increasing hoard of Indian movie magazines) she could stay in 
touch with events in the "real world", such as the bizarre disappearance of 
the incomparable Gibreel Farishta and the subsequent tragic announcement 
of his death in an airline accident; and to give her feelings of defeated, 
exhausted despair some outlet, she shouted at her daughters. The elder of 
whom, to get her own back, hacked off her hair and permitted her nipples to 
poke through shirts worn provocatively tight. 

The arrival of a fully developed devil, a horned goat-man, was, in the light of 
the foregoing, something very like the last, or at any rate the penultimate, 
straw. 

ooo 

Shaandaar residents gathered in the night—kitchen for an impromptu crisis 
summit. While Hind hurled imprecations into chicken soup, Sufyan placed 
Chamcha at a table, drawing up, for the poor fellow's use, an aluminium 



chair with a blue plastic seat, and initiated the night's proceedings. The 
theories of Lamarck, I am pleased to report, were quoted by the exiled 
schoolteacher, who spoke in his best didactic voice. When Jumpy had 
recounted the unlikely story of Chamcha's fall from the sky — the 
protagonist himself being too immersed in chicken soup and misery to speak 
for himself-- Sufyan, sucking teeth, made reference to the last edition of 
_The Origin of Species_. "In which even great Charles accepted the notion of 
mutation in extremis, to ensure survival of species; so what if his followers - 
- always more Darwinian than man himselfl -- repudiated, posthumously, 
such Lamarckian heresy, insisting on natural selection and nothing but, -- 
however, I am bound to admit, such theory is not extended to survival of 
individual specimen but only to species as a whole; -- in addition, regarding 
nature of mutation, problem is to comprehend actual utility of the change." 
"Da-ad," Anahita Sufyan, eyes lifting to heaven, cheek lying ho-hum against 
palm, interrupted these cogitations. "Give over. Point is, how'd he turn into 
such a, such a," -- admiringly -- "freak?" 

Upon which, the devil himself, looking up from chicken soup, cried out, "No, 
I'm not. I'm not a freak, O no, certainly I am not." His voice, seeming to rise 
from an unfathomable abyss of grief, touched and alarmed the younger girl, 
who rushed over to where he sat, and, impetuously caressing a shoulder of 
the unhappy beast, said, in an attempt to make amends: "Of course you 
aren't, I'm sorry, of course I don't think you're a freak; it's just that you look 
like one." 

Saladin Chamcha burst into tears. 

Mrs. Sufyan, meanwhile, had been horrified by the sight of her younger 
daughter actually laying hands on the creature, and turning to the gallery of 
nightgowned residents she waved a soup-ladle at them and pleaded for 
support. "How to tolerate? -- Honour, safety of young girls cannot be 
assured. -- That in my own house, such a thing. ..!" 
Mishal Sufyan lost patience. "Jesus, Mum." 
"_Jesus?_" 

"Dju think it's temporary?" Mishal, turning her back on scandalized Hind, 
inquired of Sufyan and Jumpy. "Some sort of possession thing -- could we 
maybe get it you know _exorcized?_" Omens, shinings, ghoulies, nightmares 
on Elm Street, stood excitedly in her eyes, and her father, as much the V C 
R aficionado as any teenager, appeared to consider the possibility seriously. 
"In _Der Steppenwolf_," he began, but Jumpy wasn't having any more of 
that. "The central requirement," he announced, "is to take an ideological 
view of the situation." 
That silenced everyone. 

"Objectively," he said, with a small self—deprecating smile, "what has 
happened here? A: Wrongful arrest, intimidation, violence. Two: Illegal 
detention, unknown medical experimentation in hospital," -- murmurs of 
assent here, as memories of intra-vaginal inspections, Depo-Provera 



scandals, unauthorized post-partum sterilizations, and, further back, the 
knowledge of Third World drug-dumping arose in every person present to 
give substance to the speaker's insinuations, -- because what you believe 
depends on what you've seen, -- not only what is visible, but what you are 
prepared to look in the face, -- and anyhow, something had to explain horns 
and hoofs; in those policed medical wards, anything could happen -- "And 
thirdly," Jumpy continued, "psychological breakdown, loss of sense of self, 
inability to cope. We've seen it all before." 

Nobody argued, not even Hind; there were some truths from which it was 
impossible to dissent. "Ideologically," Jumpy said, "I refuse to accept the 
position of victim. Certainly, he has been victim _ized_, but we know that all 
abuse of power is in part the responsibility of the abused; our passiveness 
colludes with, permits such crimes." Whereupon, having scolded the 
gathering into shamefaced submission, he requested Sufyan to make 
available the small attic room that was presently unoccupied, and Sufyan, in 
his turn, was rendered entirely unable, by feelings of solidarity and guilt, to 
ask for a single p in rent. Hind did, it is true, mumble: "Now I know the 
world is mad, when a devil becomes my house guest," but she did so under 
her breath, and nobody except her elder daughter Mishal heard what she 
said. 

Sufyan, taking his cue from his younger daughter, went up to where 
Chamcha, huddled in his blanket, was drinking enormous quantities of Hind's 
unrivalled chicken yakhni, squatted down, and placed an arm around the 
still-shivering unfortunate. "Best place for you is here," he said, speaking as 
if to a simpleton or small child. "Where else would you go to heal your 
disfigurements and recover your normal health? Where else but here, with 
us, among your own people, your own kind?" 

Only when Saladin Chamcha was alone in the attic room at the very end of 
his strength did he answer Sufyan's rhetorical question. "I'm not your kind," 
he said distinctly into the night. "You're not my people. I've spent half my 
life trying to get away from you." 
ooo 

His heart began to misbehave, to kick and stumble as if it, too, wanted to 
metamorphose into some new, diabolic form, to substitute the complex 
unpredictability of tabla improvisations for its old metronomic beat. Lying 
sleepless in a narrow bed, snagging his horns in bedsheets and pillowcases 
as he tossed and turned, he suffered the renewal of coronary eccentricity 
with a kind of fatalistic acceptance: if everything else, then why not this, too? 
Badoomboom, went the heart, and his torso jerked. _Watch it or I'll really 
let you have it. Doomboombadoom_. Yes: this was Hell, all right. The city of 
London, transformed into Jahannum, Gehenna, Muspellheim. 
Do devils suffer in Hell? Aren't they the ones with the pitchforks? 
Water began to drip steadily through the dormer window. Outside, in the 
treacherous city, a thaw had come, giving the streets the unreliable 



consistency of wet cardboard. Slow masses of whiteness slid from sloping, 
grey-slate roofs. The footprints of delivery vans corrugated the slush. First 
light; and the dawn chorus began, chattering of road--drills, chirrup of 
burglar alarms, trumpeting of wheeled creatures clashing at corners, the 
deep whirr of a large olive—green garbage eater, screaming radio—voices 
from a wooden painter's cradle clinging to the upper storey of a Free House, 
roar of the great wakening juggernauts rushing awesomely down this long 
but narrow pathway. From beneath the earth came tremors denoting the 
passage of huge subterranean worms that devoured and regurgitated human 
beings, and from the skies the thrum of choppers and the screech of higher, 
gleaming birds. 

The sun rose, unwrapping the misty city like a gift. Saladin Chamcha slept. 
Which afforded him no respite: but returned him, rather, to that other night- 
street down which, in the company of the physiotherapist Hyacinth Phillips, 
he had fled towards his destiny, clip-clop, on unsteady hoofs; and reminded 
him that, as captivity receded and the city drew nearer, Hyacinth's face and 
body had seemed to change. He saw the gap opening and widening between 
her central upper incisors, and the way her hair knotted and plaited itself 
into medusas, and the strange triangularity of her profile, which sloped 
outwards from her hairline to the tip of her nose, swung about and headed 
in an unbroken line inwards to her neck. He saw in the yellow light that her 
skin was growing darker by the minute, and her teeth more prominent, and 
her body as long as a child's stick-figure drawing. At the same time she was 
casting him glances of an ever more explicit lechery, and grasping his hand 
in fingers so bony and inescapable that it was as though a skeleton had 
seized him and was trying to drag him down into a grave; he could smell the 
freshly dug earth, the cloying scent of it, on her breath, on her lips . . . 
revulsion seized him. How could he ever have thought her attractive, even 
desired her, even gone so far as to fantasize, while she straddled him and 
pummelled fluid from his lungs, that they were lovers in the violent throes of 
sexual congress? . . . The city thickened around them like a forest; the 
buildings twined together and grew as matted as her hair. "No light can get 
in here," she whispered to him. "It's black; all black." She made as if to lie 
down and pull him towards her, towards the earth, but he shouted, "Quick, 
the church," and plunged into an unprepossessing box-like building, seeking 
more than one kind of sanctuary. Inside, however, the pews were full of 
Hyacinths, young and old, Hyacinths wearing shapeless blue two— piece suits, 
false pearls, and little pill— box hats decked out with bits of gauze, Hyacinths 
wearing virginal white nightgowns, every imaginable form of Hyacinth, all 
singing loudly, _Fix me, Jesus_; until they saw Chamcha, quit their spir— 
itualling, and commenced to bawl in a most unspiritual manner, _Satan, the 
Goat, the Goat_, and suchlike stuff. Now it became clear that the Hyacinth 
with whom he'd entered was looking at him with new eyes, just the way he'd 
looked at her in the street; that she, too, had started seeing something that 



made her feel pretty sick; and when he saw the disgust on that hideously 
pointy and clouded face he just let rip. "_Hubshees_," he cursed them in, for 
some reason, his discarded mother-tongue. Troublemakers and savages, he 
called them. "I feel sorry for you," he pronounced. "Every morning you have 
to look at yourself in the mirror and see, staring back, the darkness: the 
stain, the proof that you're the lowest of the low." They rounded upon him 
then, that congregation of Hyacinths, his own Hyacinth now lost among 
them, indistinguishable, no longer an individual but a woman-likethem, and 
he was being beaten frightfully, emitting a piteous bleating noise, running in 
circles, looking for a way out; until he realized that his assailants' fear was 
greater than their wrath, and he rose up to his full height, spread his arms, 
and screamed devilsounds at them, sending them scurrying for cover, 
cowering behind pews, as he strode bloody but unbowed from the battlefield. 
Dreams put things in their own way; but Chamcha, coming briefly awake as 
his heartbeat skipped into a new burst of syncopations, was bitterly aware 
that the nightmare had not been so very far from the truth; the spirit, at 
least, was right. -- That was the last of Hyacinth, he thought, and faded 
away again. -- To find himself shivering in the hail of his own home while, on 
a higher plane, Jumpy Joshi argued fiercely with Pamela. _With my wife_. 
And when dream-Pamela, echoing the real one word for word, had rejected 
her husband a hundred and one times, _he doesn't exist, it, such things are 
not so_, it was Jamshed the virtuous who, setting aside love and desire, 
helped. Leaving behind a weeping Pamela -- _Don't you dare bring that back 
here_, she shouted from the top floor -- from Saladin's den -- Jumpy, 
wrapping Chamcha in sheepskin and blanket, led enfeebled through the 
shadows to the Shaandaar Cafe, promising with empty kindness: "It'll be all 
right. You'll see. It'll all be fine." 

When Saladin Chamcha awoke, the memory of these words filled him with a 
bitter anger. Where's Farishta, he found himself thinking. That bastard: I bet 
he's doing okay. -- It was a thought to which he would return, with 
extraordinary results; for the moment, however, he had other fish to fry. 
I am the incarnation of evil, he thought. He had to face it. However it had 
happened, it could not be denied. I am _no longer myself_, or not only. I am 
the embodiment of wrong, of whatwe--hate, of sin. 
Why? Why me? 

What evil had he done -- what vile thing could he, would he do? 
For what was he -- he couldn't avoid the notion -- being punished? And, 
come to that, by whom? (I held my tongue.) Had he not pursued his own 
idea of _the good_, sought to become that which he most admired, 
dedicated himself with a will bordering on obsession to the conquest of 
Englishness? Had he not worked hard, avoided trouble, striven to become 
new? Assiduity, fastidiousness, moderation, restraint, self—reliance, probity, 
family life: what did these add up to if not a moral code? Was it his fault that 
Pamela and he were childless? Were genetics his responsibility? Could it be, 



in this inverted age, that he was being victimized by -- the fates, he agreed 
with himself to call the persecuting agency -- precisely _because of_ his 
pursuit of "the good"? -- That nowadays such a pursuit was considered 
wrong-headed, even evil? -- Then how cruel these fates were, to instigate 
his rejection by the very world he had so determinedly courted; how 
desolating, to be cast from the gates of the city one believed oneself to have 
taken long ago! -- What mean small-mindedness was this, to cast him back 
into the bosom of _his people_, from whom he'd felt so distant for so long! - 
- Here thoughts of Zeeny Vakil welled up, and guiltily, nervously, he forced 
them down again. 

His heart kicked him violently, and he sat up, doubled over, gasped for 
breath. _Calm down, or it's curtains. No place for such stressful cogitations: 
not any more_. He took deep breaths; lay back; emptied his mind. The 
traitor in his chest resumed normal service. 

No more of that, Saladin Chamcha told himself firmly. No more of thinking 
myself evil. Appearances deceive; the cover is not the best guide to the 
book. Devil, Goat, Shaitan? Not I. 
Not I: another. 
Who? 

ooo 

Mishal and Anahita arrived with breakfast on a tray and excitement all over 
their faces. Chamcha devoured cornflakes and Nescafe while the girls, after 
a few moments of shyness, gabbled at him, simultaneously, non--stop. "Well, 
you've set the place buzzing and no mistake." -- "You haven't gone and 
changed back in the night or anything?" -- "Listen, it's not a trick, is it? I 
mean, it's not make-up or something theatrical? -- I mean, Jumpy says 
you're an actor, and I only thought, -- I mean," and here young Anahita 
dried up, because Chamcha, spewing cornflakes, howled angrily: "Make--up? 
Theatrical? _Trick?_" 

"No offence," Mishal said anxiously on her sister's behalf. "It's just we've 
been thinking, know what I mean, and well it'd just be awful if you weren't, 
but you are, "course you are, so that's all right," she finished hastily as 
Chamcha glared at her again. -- "Thing is," Anahita resumed, and then, 
faltering, "Mean to say, well, we just think it's great." -- "You, she means," 
Mishal corrected. "We think you're, you know." -- "Brilliant," Anahita said 
and dazzled the bewildered Chamcha with a smile. "Magic. You know. 
_Extreme_." 

"We didn't sleep all night," Mishal said. "We've got ideas." 

"What we reckoned," Anahita trembled with the thrill of it, "as you've turned 

into, — what you are, — then maybe, well, probably, actually, even if you 

haven't tried it out, it could be, you could..." And the older girl finished the 

thought: "You could've developed — you know -- _powers_." 

"We thought, anyway," Anahita added, weakly, seeing the clouds gathering 

on Chamcha's brow. And, backing towards the door, added: "But we're 



probably wrong. -- Yeh. We're wrong all right. Enjoy your meal." -- Mishal, 
before she fled, took a small bottle full of green fluid out of a pocket of her 
red-andblack-check donkey jacket, put it on the floor by the door, and 
delivered the following parting shot. "O, excuse me, but Mum says, can you 
use this, it's mouthwash, for your breath." 

ooo 

That Mishal and Anahita should adore the disfiguration which he loathed with 
all his heart convinced him that "his people" were as crazily wrong-headed 
as he'd long suspected. That the two of them should respond to his 
bitterness -- when, on his second attic morning, they brought him a masala 
dosa instead of packet cereal complete with toy silver spacemen, and he 
cried out, ungratefully: "Now I'm supposed to eat this filthy foreign food?" -- 
with expressions of sympathy, made matters even worse. "Sawful muck," 
Mishal agreed with him. "No bangers in here, worse luck." Conscious of 
having insulted their hospitality, he tried to explain that he thought of 
himself, nowadays, as, well, British. . . "What about us?" Anahita wanted to 
know. "What do you think we are?" -- And Mishal confided: "Bangladesh in't 
nothing to me. Just some place Dad and Mum keep banging on about." -- 
And Anahita, conclusively: "Bungleditch." — With a satisfied nod. -- "What I 
call it, anyhow." 

But they weren't British, he wanted to tell them: not _really_, not in any 
way he could recognize. And yet his old certainties were slipping away by 
the moment, along with his old life. . . "Where's the telephone?" he 
demanded. "I've got to make some calls." 

It was in the hall; Anahita, raiding her savings, lent him the coins. His head 
wrapped in a borrowed turban, his body concealed in borrowed trousers 
(Jumpy"s) and Mishal's shoes, Chamcha dialled the past. 
"Chamcha," said the voice of Mimi Mamoulian. "You're dead." 
This happened while he was away: Mimi blacked out and lost her teeth. "A 
whiteout is what it was," she told him, speaking more harshly than usual 
because of difficulty with her jaw. "A reason why? Don't ask. Who can ask 
for reason in these times? What's your number?" she added as the pips went. 
"I'll call you right back." But it was a full five minutes before she did. "I took 
a leak. You have a reason why you're alive? Why the waters parted for you 
and the other guy but closed over the rest? Don't tell me you were worthier. 
People don't buy that nowadays, not even you, Chamcha. I was walking 
down Oxford Street looking for crocodile shoes when it happened: out cold in 
mid-stride and I fell forward like a tree, landed on the point of my chin and 
all the teeth fell out on the sidewalk in front of the man doing findthe-lady. 
People can be thoughtful, Chamcha. When I came to I found my teeth in a 
little pile next to my face. I opened my eyes and saw the little bastards 
staring at me, wasn't that nice? First thing I thought, thank God, I've got the 
money. I had them stitched back in, privately of course, great job, better 
than before. So I've been taking a break for a while. The voiceover business 



is in bad shape, let me tell you, what with you dying and my teeth, we just 
have no sense of responsibility. Standards have been lowered, Chamcha. 
Turn on the TV, listen to radio, you should hear how corny the pizza 
commercials, the beer ads with the Cherman accents from Central Casting, 
the Martians eating potato powder and sounding like they came from the 
Moon. They fired us from _The Aliens Show_. Get well soon. Incidentally, 
you might say the same for me." 

So he had lost work as well as wife, home, a grip on life. "It's not just the 
dentals that go wrong," Mimi powered on. "The fucking plosives scare me 
stupid. I keep thinking I'll spray the old bones on the street again. Age, 
Chamcha: it's all humiliations. You get born, you get beaten up and bruised 
all over and finally you break and they shovel you into an urn. Anyway, if I 
never work again I'll die comfortable. Did you know I'm with Billy Battuta 
now? That's right, how could you, you've been swimming. Yeah, I gave up 
waiting for you so I cradlesnatched one of your ethnic co-persons. You can 
take it as a compliment. Now I gots to run. Nice talking to the dead, 
Chamcha. Next time dive from the low board. Toodle oo." 
I am by nature an inward man, he said silently into the disconnected phone. 
I have struggled, in my fashion, to find my way towards an appreciation of 
the high things, towards a small measure of fineness. On good days I felt it 
was within my grasp, somewhere within me, somewhere within. But it 
eluded me. I have become embroiled, in things, in the world and its messes, 
and I cannot resist. The grotesque has me, as before the quotidian had me, 
in its thrall. The sea gave me up; the land drags me down. 
He was sliding down a grey slope, the black water lapping at his heart. Why 
did rebirth, the second chance granted to Gibreel Farishta and himself, feel 
so much, in his case, like a perpetual ending? He had been reborn into the 
knowledge of death; and the inescapability of change, of things-never-the- 
same, of noway-back, made him afraid. When you lose the past you're 
naked in front of contemptuous Azraeel, the death-angel. Hold on if you can, 
he told himself. Cling to yesterdays. Leave your nail-marks in the grey slope 
as you slide. 

Billy Battuta: that worthless piece of shit. Playboy Pakistani, turned an 
unremarkable holiday business -- _Battuta's Travels_ -- into a fleet of 
supertankers. A con--man, basically, famous for his romances with leading 
ladies of the Hindi screen and, according to gossip, for his predilection for 
white women with enormous breasts and plenty of rump, whom he "treated 
badly", as the euphemism had it, and "rewarded handsomely". What did 
Mimi want with bad Billy, his sexual instruments and his Maserati Biturbo? 
For boys like Battuta, white women -- never mind fat, Jewish, non- 
deferential white women -- were for fucking and throwing over. What one 
hates in whites -- love of brown sugar -- one 



must also hate when it turns up, inverted, in black. Bigotry is not only a 
function of power. 

Mimi telephoned the next evening from New York. Anahita called him to the 
phone in her best damnyankee tones, and he struggled into his disguise. 
When he got there she had rung off, but she rang back. "Nobody pays 
transatlantic prices for hanging on." "Mimi," he said, with desperation patent 
in his voice, "you didn't say you were leaving." "You didn't even tell me your 
damn address," she responded. "So we both have secrets." He wanted to 
say, Mimi, come home, you're going to get kicked. "I introduced him to the 
family," she said, too jokily. "You can imagine. Yassir Arafat meets the 
Begins. Never mind. We'll all live." He wanted to say, Mimi, you're all I've 
got. He managed, however, only to piss her off. "I wanted to warn you about 
Billy," was what he said. 

She went icy. "Chamcha, listen up. I'll discuss this with you one time 
because behind all your bulishit you do maybe care for me a little. So 
comprehend, please, that I am an intelligent female. I have read _Finnegans 
Wake_ and am conversant with postmodernist critiques of the West, e.g. 
that we have here a society capable only of pastiche: a 'flattened' world. 
When I become the voice of a bottle of bubble bath, I am entering Flatland 
knowingly, understanding what I'm doing and why. Viz., I am earning cash. 
And as an intelligent woman, able to do fifteen minutes on Stoicism and 
more on Japanese cinema, I say to you, Chamcha, that I am fully aware of 
Billy boy's rep. Don't teach me about exploitation. We had exploitation when 
youplural were running round in skins. Try being Jewish, female and ugly 
sometime. You'll beg to be black. Excuse my French: brown." 
"You concede, then, that he's exploiting you," Chamcha interposed, but the 
torrent swept him away. "What's the fuckin" d iff?" she trilled in her Tweetie 
Pie voice. "Billy's a funny boy, a natural scam artist, one of the greats. Who 
knows for how long this is? I'll tell you some notions I do not require: 
patriotism, God and love. Definitely not wanted on the voyage. I like Billy 
because he knows the score." 

"Mimi," he said, "something's happened to me," but she was still protesting 
too much and missed it. He put the receiver down without giving her his 
address. 

She rang him once more, a few weeks later, and by now the unspoken 
precedents had been set; she didn't ask for, he didn't give his whereabouts, 
and it was plain to them both that an age had ended, they had drifted apart, 
it was time to wave goodbye. It was still all Billy with Mimi: his plans to 
make Hindi movies in England and America, importing the top stars, Vinod 
Khanna, Sridevi, to cavort in front of Bradford Town Hall and the Golden 
Gate Bridge — "it's some sort of tax dodge, obviously," Mimi carolled gaily. 
In fact, things were heating up for Billy; Chamcha had seen his name in the 
papers, coupled with the terms _fraud squad_ and _tax evasion_, but once a 
scam man, always a ditto, Mimi said. "So he says to me, do you want a mink? 



I say, Billy, don't buy me things, but he says, who's talking about buying? 
Have a mink. It's business." They had been in New York again, and Billy had 
hired a stretched Mercedes limousine "and a stretched chauffeur also". 
Arriving at the furriers, they looked like an oil sheikh and his moll. Mimi tried 
on the five figure numbers, waiting for Billy's lead. At length he said, You 
like that one? It's nice. Billy, she whispered, it's _forty thousand_, but he 
was already smooth-talking the assistant: it was Friday afternoon, the banks 
were closed, would the store take a cheque. "Well, by now they know he's 
an oil sheikh, so they say yes, we leave with the coat, and he takes me into 
another store right around the block, points to the coat, and says, Ijust 
bought this for forty thousand dollars, here's the receipt, will you give me 
thirty for it, I need the cash, big weekend ahead." -- Mimi and Billy had been 
kept waiting while the second store rang the first, where all the alarm bells 
went off in the manager's brain, and five minutes later the police arrived, 
arrested Billy for passing a dud cheque, and he and Mimi spent the weekend 
in jail. On Monday morning the banks opened and it turned out that Billy's 
account was in credit to the tune of forty-two thousand, one hundred and 
seventeen dollars, so the cheque had been good all the time. He informed 
the furriers of his intention to sue them for two million dollars damages, 
defamation of character, open and shut case, and within forty-eight hours 
they settled out of court for $250,000 on the nail. "Don't you love him?" 
Mimi asked Chamcha. "The boy's a genius. I mean, this was _class_." 
I am a man, Chamcha realized, who does not know the score, living in an 
amoral, survivalist, get--away--with--it--world. Mishal and Anahita Sufyan, 
who still unaccountably treated him like a kind of soul-mate, in spite of all 
his attempts to dissuade them, were beings who plainly admired such 
creatures as moonlighters, shoplifters, flichers: scam artists in general. He 
corrected himself: not admired, that wasn't it. Neither girl would ever steal a 
pin. But they saw such persons as representatives of the gestalt, of how-it- 
was. As an experiment he told them the story of Billy Battuta and the mink 
coat. Their eyes shone, and at the end they applauded and giggled with 
delight: wickedness unpunished made them laugh. Thus, Chamcha realized, 
people must once have applauded and giggled at the deeds of earlier 
outlaws, DickTurpin, Ned Kelly, Phoolan Devi, and of course that other Billy: 
William Bonney, also a Kid. 

"Scrapheap Youths' Criminal Idols," Mishal read his mind and then, laughing 
at his disapproval, translated it into yellowpress headlines, while arranging 
her long, and, Chamcha realized, astonishing body into similarly 
exaggerated cheesecake postures. Pouting outrageously, fully aware of 
having stirred him, she prettily added: "Kissy kissy?" 

Her younger sister, not to be outdone, attempted to copy Mishal's pose, with 
less effective results. Abandoning the attempt with some annoyance, she 
spoke sulkily. "Trouble is, we've got good prospects, us. Family business, no 
brothers, bob's your uncle. This place makes a packet, dunnit? Well then." 



The Shaandaar rooming-house was categorized as a Bed and Breakfast 
establishment, of the type that borough councils were using more and more 
owing to the crisis in public housing, lodging fiveperson families in single 
rooms, turning blind eyes to health and safety regulations, and claiming 
"temporary accommodation" allowances from the central government. "Ten 
quid per night per person," Anahita informed Chamcha in his attic. "Three 
hundred and fifty nicker per room per week, it comes to, as often as not. Six 
occupied rooms: you work it out. Right now, we're losing three hundred 
pounds a month on this attic, so I hope you feel really bad." For that kind of 
money, it struck Chamcha, you could rent pretty reasonable family-sized 
apartments in the private sector. But that wouldn't be classified as 
temporary accommodation; no central funding for such solutions. Which 
would also be opposed by local politicians committed to fighting the "cuts". 
_La lutte continue_; meanwhile, Hind and her daughters raked in the cash, 
unworldly Sufyan went to Mecca and came home to dispense homely wisdom, 
kindliness and smiles. And behind six doors that opened a crack every time 
Chamcha went to make a phone call or use the toilet, maybe thirty 
temporary human beings, with little hope of being declared permanent. 
The real world. 

"You needn't look so fish-faced and holy, anyway," Mishal Sufyan pointed 
out. "Look where all your law abiding got you." 

ooo 

"Your universe is shrinking." A busy man, Hal Valance, creator of _The Aliens 
Show_ and sole owner of the property, took exactly seventeen seconds to 
congratulate Chamcha on being alive before beginning to explain why this 
fact did not affect the show's decision to dispense with his services. Valance 
had started out in advertising and his vocabulary had never recovered from 
the blow. Chamcha could keep up, however. All those years in the voiceover 
business taught you a little bad language. In marketing parlance, _a 
universe_ was the total potential market for a given product or service: the 
chocolate universe, the slimming universe. The dental universe was 
everybody with teeth; the others were the denture cosmos. "I'm talking," 
Valance breathed down the phone in his best Deep Throat voice, "about the 
ethnic universe." 

_My people again_: Chamcha, disguised in turban and the rest of his ill- 
fitting drag, hung on a telephone in a passageway while the eyes of 
impermanent women and children gleamed through barely opened doors; 
and wondered what his people had done to him now. "No capeesh," he said, 
remembering Valance's fondness for Italian—American argot -- this was, 
after all, the author of the fast food slogan _Getta pizza da action_. On this 
occasion, however, Valance wasn't playing. "Audience surveys show," he 
breathed, "that ethnics don't watch ethnic shows. They don't want "em, 
Chamcha. They want fucking _Dynasty_, like everyone else. Your profile's 
wrong, if you follow: with you in the show it's just too damn racial. _The 



Aliens Show_ is too big an idea to be held back by the racial dimension. The 
merchandising possibilities alone, but I don't have to tell you this." 
Chamcha saw himself reflected in the small cracked mirror above the phone 
box. He looked like a marooned genie in search of a magic lamp. "It's a 
point of view," he answered Valance, knowing argument to be useless. With 
Hal, all explanations were post facto rationalizations. He was strictly a seat— 
of— the--pants man, who took for his motto the advice given by Deep Throat 
to Bob Woodward: _Follow the money_. He had the phrase set in large sans- 

-serif type and pinned up in his office over a still from All the President's 

Men_: Hal Holbrook (another Hal!) in the car park, standing in the shadows. 
Follow the money: it explained, as he was fond of saying, his five wives, all 
independently wealthy, from each of whom he had received a handsome 
divorce settlement. He was presently married to a wasted child maybe one— 
third his age, with waist—length auburn hair and a spectral look that would 
have made her a great beauty a quarter of a century earlier. "This one 
doesn't have a bean; she's taking me for all I've got and when she's taken it 
she'll bugger off," Valance had told Chamcha once, in happier days. "What 
the hell. I'm human, too. This time it's love." More cradlesnatching. No 
escape from it in these times. Chamcha on the telephone found he couldn't 
remember the infant's name. "You know my motto," Valance was saying. 
"Yes," Chamcha said neutrally. "It's the right line for the product." The 
product, you bastard, being you. 

By the time he met Hal Valance (how many years ago? Five, maybe six), 
over lunch at the White Tower, the man was already a monster: pure, self- 
created image, a set of attributes plastered thickly over a body that was, in 
Hal's own words, "in training to be Orson Welles". He smoked absurd, 
caricature cigars, refusing all Cuban brands, however, on account of his 
uncompromisingly capitalistic stance. He owned a Union Jack waistcoat and 
insisted on flying the flag over his agency and also above the door of his 
Highgate home; was prone to dress up as Maurice Chevalier and sing, at 
major presentations, to his amazed clients, with the help of straw boater and 
silver— headed cane; claimed to own the first Loire chateau to be fitted with 
telex and fax machines; and made much of his "intimate" association with 
the Prime Minister he referred to affectionately as "Mrs. Torture". The 
personification of philistine triumphalism, midatlantic— accented Hal was one 
of the glories of the age, the creative half of the city's hottest agency, the 
Valance & Lang Partnership. Like Billy Battuta he liked big cars driven by big 
chauffeurs. It was said that once, while being driven at high speed down a 
Cornish lane in order to "heat up" a particularly glacial seven-foot Finnish 
model, there had been an accident: no injuries, but when the other driver 
emerged furiously from his wrecked vehicle he turned out to be even larger 
than Hal's minder. As this colossus bore down on him, Hal lowered his push- 
button window and breathed, with a sweet smile: "I strongly advise you to 
turn around and walk swiftly away; because, sir, if you do not do so within 



the next fifteen seconds, I am going to have you killed." Other advertising 
geniuses were famous for their work: Mary Wells for her pink Braniff planes, 
David Ogilvy for his eyepatch,Jerry della Femina for "From those wonderful 
folks who gave you Pearl Harbor". Valance, whose agency went in for cheap 
and cheerful vulgarity, all bums and honky-tonk, was renowned in the 
business for this (probably apocryphal) "I'm going to have you killed", a turn 
of phrase which proved, to those in the know, that the guy really was a 
genius. Chamcha had long suspected he'd made up the story, with its 
perfect ad-land components — Scandinavian icequcen, two thugs, expensive 
cars, Valance in the Blofeld role and 007 nowhere on the scene -- and put it 
about himself, knowing it to be good for business. 

The lunch was by way of thanking Chamcha for his part in a recent, smash- 
hit campaign for Slimbix diet foods. Saladin had been the voice of a cutesy 
cartoon blob: _Hi. I'm Cal, and I'm one sad calorie_. Four courses and plenty 
of champagne as a reward for persuading people to starve. _How's a poor 
calorie to earn a salary? Thanks to Slimbix, I'm out of work_. Chamcha 
hadn't known what to expect from Valance. What he got was, at least, 
unvarnished. "You've done well," Hal congratulated him, "for a person of the 
tinted persuasion." And proceeded, without taking his eyes off Chamcha's 
face: "Let me tell you some facts. Within the last three months, we re--shot 
a peanut—butter poster because it researched better without the black kid in 
the background. We re-recorded a building society jingle because 
T'Chairman thought the singer sounded black, even though he was white as 
a sodding sheet, and even though, the year before, we'd used a black boy 
who, luckily for him, didn't suffer from an excess of soul. We were told by a 
major airline that we couldn't use any blacks in their ads, even though they 
were actually employees oi the airline. A black actor came to audition for me 
and he was wearing a Racial Equality button badge, a black hand shaking a 
white one. I said this: don't think you're getting special treatment from me, 
chum. You follow me? You follow what I'm telling you?" It's a goddamn 
audition, Saladin realized. "I've never felt I belonged to a race," he replied. 
Which was perhaps why, when Hal Valance set up his production company, 
Chamcha was on his "A list"; and why, eventually, Maxim Alien came his 
way. 

When _The Aliens Show_ started coming in for stick from black radicals, 
they gave Chamcha a nickname. On account of his private-school education 
and closeness to the hated Valance, he was known as "Brown Uncle Tom". 
Apparently the political pressure on the show had increased in Chamcha's 
absence, orchestrated by a certain Dr. Uhuru Simba. "Doctor of what, beats 
me," Valance deepthroatcd down the phone. "Our ah researchers haven't 
come up with anything yet." Mass pickets, an embarrassing appearance on 
_Right to Reply_. "The guy's built like a fucking tank." Chamcha envisaged 
the pair of them, Valance and Simba, as one another's antitheses. It seemed 
that the protests had succeeded: Valance was "de— politicizing" the show, by 



firing Chamcha and putting a huge blond Teuton with pectorals and a quiff 
inside the prosthetic make-up and computergenerated imagery. A latex-and- 
Quantel Schwarzenegger, a synthetic, hip-talking version of Rutger Hauer in 
_Blade Runner_. The Jews were out, too: instead of Mimi, the new show 
would have a voluptuous shiksa doll. "I sent word to Dr. Simba: stick that up 
your fucking pee aitch dee. No reply has been received. He'll have to work 
harder than that if he's going to take over _this_ little country. I," Hal 
Valance announced, "love this fucking country. That's why I'm going to sell it 
to the whole goddamn world, Japan, America, fucking Argentina. I'm going 
to sell the arse off it. That's what I've been selling all my fucking life: the 
fucking nation. The _flag_." He didn't hear what he was saying. When he got 
going on this stuff, he went puce and often wept. He had done just that at 
the White Tower, that first time, while stuffing himself full of Greek food. The 
date came back to Chamcha now: just after the Falklands war. People had a 
tendency to swear loyalty oaths in those days, to hum "Pomp and 
Circumstance" on the buses. So when Valance, over a large balloon of 
Armagnac, started up -- "I'll tell you why I love this country" -- Chamcha, 
pro-Falklands himself, thought he knew what was coming next. But Valance 
began to describe the research programme of a British aerospace company, 
a client of his, which had just revolutionized the construction of missile 
guidance systems by studying the flight pattern of the common housefly. 
"Inflight course corrections," he whispered theatrically. "Traditionally done in 
the line of flight: adjust the angle up a bit, down a touch, left or right a 
nadge. Scientists studying high-speed film of the humble fly, however, have 
discovered that the little buggers always, but always, make corrections _in 
right angles_." He demonstrated with his hand stretched out, palm flat, 
fingers together. "Bzzt! Bzzt! The bastards actually fly vertically up, down or 
sideways. Much more accurate. Much more fuel efficient. Try to do it with an 
engine that depends on nose-to-tail airflow, and what happens? The sodding 
thing can't breathe, stalls, falls out of the sky, lands on your fucking allies. 
Bad karma. You follow. You follow what I'm saying. So these guys, they 
invent an engine with three—way airflow: nose to tail, plus top to bottom, 
plus side to side. And bingo: a missile that flies like a goddamn fly, and can 
hit a fifty p coin travelling at a ground speed of one hundred miles an hour 
at a distance of three miles. What I love about this country is that: its genius. 
Greatest inventors in the world. It's beautiful: am I right or am I right?" He 
had been deadly serious. Chamcha answered: "You're right." "You're damn 
right I'm right," he confirmed. 

They met for the last time just before Chamcha took off for Bombay: Sunday 
lunch at the flag-waving Highgate mansion. Rosewood panelling, a terrace 
with stone urns, a view down a wooded hill. Valance complaining about a 
new development that would louse up the scenery. Lunch was predictably 
jingoistic: _rosbif, boudin Yorkshire, choux de bruxelles_. Baby, the 
nymphet wife, didn't join them, but ate hot pastrami on rye while shooting 



pool in a nearby room. Servants, a thunderous Burgundy, more Armagnac, 
cigars. The self—made man's paradise, Chamcha reflected, and recognized 
the envy in the thought. 

After lunch, a surprise. Valance led him into a room in which there stood two 
clavichords of great delicacy and lightness. "I make "em," his host confessed. 
"To relax. Baby wants me to make her a fucking guitar." Hal Valance's talent 
as a cabinet—maker was undeniable, and somehow at odds with the rest of 
the man. "My father was in the trade," he admitted under Chamcha's 
probing, and Saladin understood that he had been granted a privileged 
glimpse into the only piece that remained of Valance's original self, the 
Harold that derived from history and blood and not from his own frenetic 
brain. 

When they left the secret chamber of the clavichords, the familiar Hal 
Valance instantly reappeared. Leaning on the balustrade of his terrace, he 
confided: "The thing that's so amazing about her is the size of what she's 
trying to do." Her? Baby? Chamcha was confused. "I'm talking about you- 
know-who," Valance explained helpfully. "Torture. Maggie the Bitch." Oh. 
"She's radical all right. What she wants -- what she actually thinks she can 
fucking _achieve_ -- is literally to invent a whole goddamn new middle class 
in this country. Get rid of the old woolly incompetent buggers from fucking 
Surrey and Hampshire, and bring in the new. People without background, 
without history. Hungry people. People who really _want_, and who know 
that with her, they can bloody well get. 

Nobody's ever tried to replace a whole fucking _class_ before, and the 
amazing thing is she might just do it if they don't get her first. The old class. 
The dead men. You follow what I'm saying." "I think so," Chamcha lied. "And 
it's not just the businessmen," Valance said slurrily. "The intellectuals, too. 
Out with the whole faggoty crew. In with the hungry guys with the wrong 
education. New professors, new painters, the lot. It's a bloody revolution. 
Newness coming into this country that's stuffed full of fucking old _corpses_. 
It's going to be something to see. It already is." 
Baby wandered out to meet them, looking bored. "Time you were off, 
Chamcha," her husband commanded. "On Sunday afternoons we go to bed 
and watch pornography on video. It's a whole new world, Saladin. 
Everybody has to join sometime." 

No compromises. You're in or you're dead. It hadn't been Chamcha's way; 
not his, nor that of the England he had idolized and come to conquer. He 
should have understood then and there: he was being given, had been given, 
fair warning. 

And now the coup de grace. "No hard feelings," Valance was murmuring into 

his ear. "See you around, eh? Okay, right." 

"Hal," he made himself object, "I've got a contract." 

Like a goat to the slaughter. The voice in his ear was now openly amused. 

"Don't be silly," it told him. "Of course you haven't. Read the small print. Get 



a _lawyer_ to read the small print. Take me to court. Do what you have to 
do. It's nothing to me. Don't you get it? You're history." 
Dialling tone. 

ooo 

Abandoned by one alien England, marooned within another, Mr. Saladin 
Chamcha in his great dejection received news of an old companion who was 
evidently enjoying better fortunes. The shriek of his landlady -- "_Tini 
benche achen!_" -- warned him that something was up. Hind was billowing 
along the corridors of the Shaandaar B and B, waving, it turned out, a 
current copy of the imported Indian fanzine _Cine-Blitz_. Doors opened; 
temporary beings popped out, looking puzzled and alarmed. 
Mishal Sufyan emerged from her room with yards of midriff showing 
between shortie tank-top and 501s. From the office he maintained across 
the hall, Hanif Johnson emerged in the incongruity of a sharp three— piece 
suit, was hit by the midriff and covered his face. "Lord have mercy," he 
prayed. Mishal ignored him and yelled after her mother: "What's up? Who's 
alive?" 

"Shameless from somewhere," Hind shouted back along the passage, "cover 
your nakedness." 

"Fuck off," Mishal muttered under her breath, fixing mutinous eyes on Hanif 
Johnson. "What about the michelins sticking out between her sari and her 
choli, I want to know." Down at the other end of the passage, Hind could be 
seen in the half-light, thrusting _Cine-Blitz_ at the tenants, repeating, he's 
alive. With all the fervour of those Greeks who, after the disappearance of 
the politician Lambrakis, covered the country with the whitewashed letter 
_Z_. _Zi: he lives_. 
"Who?" Mishal demanded again. 

"_Gibreel_," came the cry of impermanent children. "_Farishta benche 
achen_." Hind, disappearing downstairs, did not observe her elder daughter 
returning to her room, -- leaving the door ajar; -- and being followed, when 
he was sure the coast was clear, by the well-known lawyer Hanif Johnson, 
suited and booted, who maintained this office to keep in touch with the 
grass roots, who was also doing well in a smart uptown practice, who was 
well connected with the local Labour Party and was accused by the sitting M 
P of scheming to take his place when reselection came around. 
When was Mishal Sufyan's eighteenth birthday? -- Not for a few weeks yet. 
And where was her sister, her roommate, sidekick, shadow, echo and foil? 
Where was the potential chaperone? She was: out. 
But to continue: 

The news from _Cine-Blitz_ was that a new, London-based film production 
outfit headed by the whiz-kid tycoon Billy Battuta, whose interest in cinema 
was well known, had entered into an association with the reputable, 
independent Indian producer Mr. S. S. Sisodia for the purpose of producing a 
comeback vehicle for the legendary Gibreel, now exclusively revealed to 



have escaped the jaws of death for a second time. "It is true I was booked 
on the plane under the name of Najmuddin," the star was quoted as saying. 
"I know that when the investigating sleuths identified this as my incognito -- 
in fact, my real name -- it caused great grief back home, and for this I do 
sincerely apologize to my fans. You see, the truth is, that grace of God I 
somehow missed the flight, and as I had wished in any case to go to ground, 
excuse, please, no pun intended, I permitted the fiction of my demise to 
stand uncorrected and took a later flight. Such luck: truly, an angel must 
have been watching over me." After a time of reflection, however, he had 
concluded that it was wrong to deprive his public, in this unsportsmanlike 
and hurtful way, of the true data and also his presence on the screen. 
"Therefore I have accepted this project with full commitment and joy." The 
film was to be -- what else -- a theological, but of a new type. It would be 
set in an imaginary and fabulous city made of sand, and would recount the 
story of the encounter between a prophet and an archangel; also the 
temptation of the prophet, and his choice of the path of purity and not that 
of base compromise. "It is a film," the producer, Sisodia, informed _Cine - 
Blitz_, "about how newness enters the world." — But would it not be seen as 
blasphemous, a crime against ... — "Certainly not," Billy Battuta insisted. 
"Fiction is fiction; facts are facts. Our purpose is not to make some farrago 
like that movie _The Message_ in which, whenever Prophet Muhammad (on 
whose name be peace!) was heard to speak, you saw only the head of his 
camel, moving its mouth. _That_ -- excuse me for pointing out -- had no 
class. We are making a high--taste, quality picture. A moral tale: like -- 
what do you call them? -- fables." 
"Like a dream," Mr. Sisodia said. 

When the news was brought to Chamcha's attic later that day by Anahita 
and Mishal Sufyan, he flew into the vilest rage either of them had ever 
witnessed, a fury under whose fearful influence his voice rose so high that it 
seemed to tear, as if his throat had grown knives and ripped his cries to 
shreds; his pestilential breath all but blasted them from the room, and with 
arms raised high and goat--legs dancing he looked, at last, like the very 
devil whose image he had become. "Liar," he shrieked at the absent Gibreel. 
"Traitor, deserter, scum. Missed the plane, did you? -- Then whose head, in 
my own lap, with my own hands ...?-- who received caresses, spoke of 
nightmares, and fell at last singing from the sky?" 

"There, there," pleaded terrified Mishal. "Calm down. You'll have Mum up 
here in a minute." 

Saladin subsided, a pathetic goaty heap once again, no threat to anyone. 
"It's not true," he wailed. "What happened, happened to us both." 
"Course it did," Anahita encouraged him. "Nobody believes those movie 
magazines, anyway. They'll say anything, them." 

Sisters backed out of the room, holding their breath, leaving Chamcha to his 
misery, failing to observe something quite remarkable. For which they must 



not be blamed; Chamcha's antics were sufficient to have distracted the 
keenest eyes. It should also, in fairness, be stated that Saladin failed to 
notice the change himself. 

What happened? This: during Chamcha's brief but violent outburst against 
Gibreel, the horns on his head (which, one may as well point out, had grown 
several inches while he languished in the attic of the Shaandaar B and B) 
definitely, unmistakably, -- by about three-quarters of an inch, -- 
_diminished_. 

In the interest of the strictest accuracy, one should add that, lower down his 
transformed body, -- inside borrowed pantaloons (delicacy forbids the 
publication of explicit details), -- something else, let us leave it at that, got a 
little smaller, too. 

Be that as it may: it transpired that the optimism of the report in the 
imported movie magazine had been ill founded, because within days of its 
publication the local papers carried news of Billy Battuta's arrest, in a 
midtown New York sushi bar, along with a female companion, Mildred 
Mamoulian, described as an actress, forty years of age. The story was that 
he had approached numbers of society matrons, "movers and shakers", 
asking for "very substantial" sums of money which he had claimed to need in 
order to buy his freedom from a sect of devil worshippers. Once a confidence 
man, always a confidence man: it was what Mimi Mamoulian would no doubt 
have described as a beautiful sting. Penetrating the heart of American 
religiosity, pleading to be saved -- "when you sell your soul you can't expect 
to buy back cheap" -- Billy had banked, the investigators alleged, "six figure 
sums". The world community of the faithful longed, in the late 1980s, for 
_direct contact with the supernaL, and Billy, claiming to have raised (and 
therefore to need rescuing from) infernal fiends, was on to a winner, 
especially as the Devil he offered was so democratically responsive to the 
dictates of the Almighty Dollar. What Billy offered the West Side matrons in 
return for their fat cheques was verification: yes, there is a Devil; I've seen 
him with my own eyes -- God, it was frightful! -- and if Lucifer existed, so 
must Gabriel; if Hellfire had been seen to burn, then somewhere, over the 
rainbow, Paradise must surely shine. Mimi Mamoulian had, it was alleged, 
played a full part in the deceptions, weeping and pleading for all she was 
worth. They were undone by overconfidence, spotted at Takesushi 
(whooping it up and cracking jokes with the chef) by a Mrs. Aileen 
Struwelpeter who had, only the previous afternoon, handed the then- 
distraught and terrified couple a five-thousand-dollar cheque. Mrs. 
Struwelpeter was not without influence in the New York Police Department, 
and the boys in blue arrived before Mimi had finished her tempura. They 
both went quietly. Mimi was wearing, in the newspaper photographs, what 
Chamcha guessed was a forty-thousanddollar mink coat, and an expression 
on her face that could only be read one way. 



_The hell with you all_. Nothing further was heard, for some while, about 

Farishta's film. 

ooo 

_It was so, it was not_, that as Saladin Chamcha's incarceration in the body 
of a devil and the attic of the Shaandaar B and B lengthened into weeks and 
months, it became impossible not to notice that his condition was worsening 
steadily. His horns (notwithstanding their single, momentary and 
unobserved diminution) had grown both thicker and longer, twirling 
themselves into fanciful arabesques, wreathing his head in a turban of 
darkening bone. He had grown a thick, long beard, a disorienting 
development in one whose round, moony face had never boasted much hair 
before; indeed, he was growing hairier all over his body, and had even 
sprouted, from the base of his spine, a fine tail that lengthened by the day 
and had already obliged him to abandon the wearing of trousers; he tucked 
the new limb, instead, inside baggy salwar pantaloons filched by Anahita 
Sufyan from her mother's generously tailored collection. The distress 
engendered in him by his continuing metamorphosis into some species of 
bottled djinn will readily be imagined. Even his appetites were altering. 
Always fussy about his food, he was appalled to find his palate coarsening, 
so that all foodstuffs began to taste much the same, and on occasion he 
would find himself nibbling absently at his bedsheets or old newspapers, and 
come to his senses with a start, guilty and shamefaced at this further 
evidence of his progress away from manhood and towards -- yes -- 
goatishness. Increasing quantities of green mouthwash were required to 
keep his breath within acceptable limits. It really was too grievous to be 
borne. 

His presence in the house was a continual thorn in the side of Hind, in whom 
regret for the lost income mingled with the remnants of her initial terror, 
although it's true to say that the soothing processes of habituation had 
worked their sorceries on her, helping her to see Saladin's condition as some 
kind of Elephant Man illness, a thing to feel disgusted by but not necessarily 
to fear. "Let him keep out of my way and I'll keep out of his," she told her 
daughters. "And you, the children of my despair, why you spend your time 
sitting up there with a sick person while your youth is flying by, who can say, 
but in this Vilayet it seems everything I used to know is a lie, such as the 
idea that young girls should help their mothers, think of marriage, attend to 
studies, and not go sitting with goats, whose throats, on Big Eid, it is our old 
custom to slit." 

Her husband remained solicitous, however, even after the strange incident 
that took place when he ascended to the attic and suggested to Saladin that 
the girls might not have been so wrong, that perhaps the, how could one put 
it, possession of his body could be terminated by the intercession of a 
mullah? At the mention of a priest Chamcha reared up on his feet, raising 
both arms above his head, and somehow or other the room filled up with 



dense and sulphurous smoke while a highpitched vibrato screech with a kind 
of tearing quality pierced Sufyan's hearing like a spike. The smoke cleared 
quickly enough, because Chamcha flung open a window and fanned 
feverishly at the fumes, while apologizing to Sufyan in tones of acute 
embarrassment: "I really can't say what came over me, -- but at times I 
fear I am changing into something, -- something one must call bad." 
Sufyan, kindly fellow that he was, went over to where Chamcha sat clutching 
at his horns, patted him on the shoulder, and tried to bring what good cheer 
he could. "Question of mutability of the essence of the self," he began, 
awkwardly, "has long been subject of profound debate. For example, great 
Lucretius tells us, in _De Rerum Natura_, this following thing: _quodcumque 
suis mutatumfinibus exit, continuo hoc mors est illius quodfuit ante_. Which 
being translated, forgive my clumsiness, is 'Whatever by its changing goes 
out of its frontiers,' --that is, bursts its banks, -- or, maybe, breaks out of its 
limitations, -- so to speak, disregards its own rules, but that is too free, I am 
thinking . . 'that thing', at any rate, Lucretius holds, 'by doing so brings 
immediate death to its old self. However," up went the ex-- schoolmaster's 
finger, "poet Ovid, in the _Metamorphoses_, takes diametrically opposed 
view. He avers thus: 'As yielding wax' -- heated, you see, possibly for the 
sealing of documents or such, -- 'is stamped with new designs And changes 
shape and seems not still the same, Yet is indeed the same, even so our 
souls,' -- you hear, good sir? Our spirits! Our immortal essences! -- 'Are still 
the same forever, but adopt In their migrations ever-varying forms.'" 
He was hopping, now, from foot to foot, full of the thrill of the old words. 
"For me it is always Ovid over Lucretius," he stated. "Your soul, my good 
poor dear sir, is the same. Only in its migration it has adopted this presently 
varying form." 

"This is pretty cold comfort," Chamcha managed a trace of his old dryness. 
"Either I accept Lucretius and conclude that some demonic and irreversible 
mutation is taking place in my inmost depths, or I go with Ovid and concede 
that everything now emerging is no more than a manifestation of what was 
already there." 

"I have put my argument badly," Sufyan miserably apologized. "I meant 
only to reassure." 

"What consolation can there be," Chamcha answered with bitter rhetoric, his 
irony crumbling beneath the weight of his unhappiness, "for a man whose 
old friend and rescuer is also the nightly lover of his wife, thus encouraging - 
- as your old books would doubtless affirm -- the growth of cuckold's horns?" 

ooo 

The old friend, Jumpy Joshi, was unable for a single moment of his 



waking hours to rid himself of the knowledge that, for the first time in as 
long as he could remember, he had lost the will to lead his life according to 
his own standards of morality. At the sports centre where he taught martial 
arts techniques to ever— greater numbers of students, emphasizing the 
spiritual aspects of the disciplines, much to their amusement ("Ah so, 
Grasshopper," his star pupil Mishal Sufyan would tease him, "when 
honolable fascist swine jump at you flom dark alleyway, offer him teaching 
of Buddha before you kick him in honolable balls"), -- he began to display 
such _passionate intensity_ that his pupils, realizing that some inner anguish 
was being expressed, grew alarmed. When Mishal asked him about it at the 
end of a session that had left them both bruised and panting for breath, in 
which the two of them, teacher and star, had hurled themselves at one 
another like the hungriest of lovers, he threw her question back at her with 
an uncharacteristic lack of openness. "Talk about pot and kettle," he said. 
"Question of mote and beam." They were standing by the vending machines. 
She shrugged. "Okay," she said. "I confess, but keep the secret." He 
reached for his Coke: "What secret?" Innocent Jumpy. Mishal whispered in 
his ear: "I'm getting laid. By your friend: Mister Hanif Johnson, Bar At Law." 
He was shocked, which irritated her. "O, come on. It's not like I'm 
_fifteen_." He replied, weakly, "If your mother ever," and once again she 
was impatient. "If you want to know," petulantly, "the one I'm worried about 
is Anahita. She wants whatever I've got. And she, by the way, really is 
fifteen." Jumpy noticed that he'd knocked over his paper-cup and there was 
Coke on his shoes. "Out with it," Mishal was insisting. "I owned up. Your 
turn." But Jumpy couldn't say; was still shaking his head about Hanif. "It'd 
be the finish of him," he said. That did it. Mishal put her nose in the air. "O, I 
get it," she said. "Not good enough for him, you reckon." And over her 
departing shoulder: "Here, Grasshopper. Don't holy men ever fuck?" 
Not so holy. He wasn't cut out for sainthood, any more than the David 
Carradine character in the old _Kung Fu_ programmes: like Grasshopper, 
like Jumpy. Every day he wore himself out trying to stay away from the big 
house in Notting Hill, and every evening he ended up at Pamela's door, 
thumb in mouth, biting the skin around the edges of the nail, fending off the 
dog and his own guilt, heading without wasting any time for the bedroom. 
Where they would fall upon one another, mouths searching out the places in 
which they had chosen, or learned, to begin: first his lips around her nipples, 
then hers moving along his lower thumb. 

She had come to love in him this quality of impatience, because it was 
followed by a patience such as she had never experienced, the patience of a 
man who had never been "attractive" and was therefore prepared to value 
what was offered, or so she had thought at first; but then she learned to 
appreciate his consciousness of and solicitude for her own internal tensions, 
his sense of the difficulty with which her slender, bony, small-breasted body 
found, learned and finally surrendered to a rhythm, his knowledge of time. 



She loved in him, too, his overcoming of himself; loved, knowing it to be a 
wrong reason, his willingness to overcome his scruples so that they might be 
together: loved the desire in him that rode over all that had been imperative 
in him. Loved it, without being willing to see, in this love, the beginning of 
an end. 

Near the end of their lovemaking, she became noisy. "Yow!" she shouted, all 
the aristocracy in her voice crowding into the meaningless syllables of her 
abandonment. "Whoop! Hi! _Hah_." 

She was still drinking heavily, scotch bourbon rye, a stripe of redness 
spreading across the centre of her face. Under the influence of alcohol her 
right eye narrowed to half the size of the left, and she began, to his horror, 
to disgust him. No discussion of her boozing was permitted, however: the 
one time he tried he found himself on the street with his shoes clutched in 
his right hand and his overcoat over his left arm. Even after that he came 
back: and she opened the door and went straight upstairs as though nothing 
had happened. Pamela's taboos: jokes about her background, mentions of 
whisky-bottle "dead soldiers", and any suggestion that her late husband, the 
actor Saladin Chamcha, was still alive, living across town in a bed and 
breakfast joint, in the shape of a supernatural beast. 
These days, Jumpy — who had, at first, badgered her incessantly about 
Saladin, telling her she should go ahead and divorce him, but this pretence 
of widowhood was intolerable: what about the man's assets, his rights to a 
share of the property, and so forth? Surely she would not leave him 
destitute? -- no longer protested about her unreasonable behaviour. "I've 
got a confirmed report of his death," she told him on the only occasion on 
which she was prepared to say anything at all. "And what have you got? A 
billy-goat, a circus freak, nothing to do with me." And this, too, like her 
drinking, had begun to come between them. Jumpy's martial arts sessions 
increased in vehemence as these problems loomed larger in his mind. 
Ironically, while Pamela refused point—blank to face the facts about her 
estranged husband, she had become embroiled, through her job at the 
community relations committee, in an investigation into allegations of the 
spread of witchcraft among the officers at the local police station. Various 
stations did from time to time gain the reputation of being "out of control" — 
Notting Hill, Kentish Town, Islington -- but witchcraft? Jumpy was sceptical. 
"The trouble with you," Pamela told him in her loftiest shootingstick voice, 
"is that you still think of normality as being normal. My God: look at what's 
happening in this country. A few bent coppers taking their clothes off and 
drinking urine out of helmets isn't so weird. Call it working-class 
Freemasonry, if you want. I've got black people coming in every day, scared 
out of their heads, talking about obeah, chicken entrails, the lot. The 
goddamn bastards are _enjoying_ this: scare the coons with their own ooga 
booga and have a few naughty nights into the bargain. Unlikely? Bloody 
_wake up_." Witchfinding, it seemed, ran in the family: from Matthew 



Hopkins to Pamela Lovelace. In Pamela's voice, speaking at public meetings, 
on local radio, even on regional news programmes on television, could be 
heard all the zeal and authority of the old Witchflnder-General, and it was 
only on account of that voice of a twentieth-century Gloriana that her 
campaign was not laughed instantly into extinction. _New Broomstick 
Needed to Sweep Out Witches_. There was talk of an official inquiry. What 
drove Jumpy wild, however, was Pamela's refusal to connect her arguments 
in the question of the occult policemen to the matter of her own husband: 
because, after all, the transformation of Saladin Chamcha had precisely to 
do with the idea that normality was no longer composed (if it had ever been) 
of banal, "normal" elements. "Nothing to do with it," she said flatly when he 
tried to make the point: imperious, he thought, as any hanging judge. 

ooo 

After Mishal Sufyan told him about her illegal sexual relations with Hanif 
Johnson, Jumpy on his way over to Pamela Chamcha's had to stifle a 
number of bigoted thoughts, such as _his father hadn't been white he'd 
never have done it_; Hanif, he raged, that immature bastard who probably 
cut notches in his cock to keep count of his conquests, this Johnson with 
aspirations to represent his people who couldn't wait until they were of age 
before he started shafting them! . . . couldn't he see that Mishal with her 
omniscient body was just a, just a, child? -- No she wasn't. -- Damn him, 
then, damn him for (and here Jumpy shocked himself) being the first. 
Jumpy en route to his mistress tried to convince himself that his 
resentments of Hanif, _his friend Hanif_, were primarily -- how to put it? -- 
_linguistic_. Hanif was in perfect control of the languages that mattered: 
sociological, socialistic, black— radical, anti— anti— anti— racist, demagogic, 
oratorical, sermonic: the vocabularies of power. _But you bastard you 
rummage in my drawers and laugh at my stupid poems. The real language 
problem: how to bend it shape it, how to let it be our freedom, how to 
repossess its poisoned wells, how to master the river of words of time of 
blood: about all that you haven't got a clue_. How hard that struggle, how 
inevitable the defeat. _Nobody's going to elect me to anything. No power- 
base, no constituency: just the battle with the words_. But he, Jumpy, also 
had to admit that his envy of Hanif was as much as anything rooted in the 
other's greater control of the languages of desire. Mishal Sufyan was quite 
something, an elongated, tubular beauty, but he wouldn't have known how, 
even if he'd thought of, he'd never have dared. Language is courage: the 
ability to conceive a thought, to speak it, and by doing so to make it true. 
When Pamela Chamcha answered the door he found that her hair had gone 
snow-white overnight, and that her response to this inexplicable calamity 
had been to shave her head right down to the scalp and then conceal it 
inside an absurd burgundy turban which she refused to remove. 
"It just happened," she said. "One must not rule out the possibility that I 
have been bewitched." 



He wasn't standing for that. "Or the notion of a reaction, however delayed, 
to the news of your husband's altered, but extant, state." 
She swung to face him, halfway up the stairs to the bedroom, and pointed 
dramatically towards the open sitting-room door. "In that case," she 
triumphed, "why did it also happen to the dog?" 

ooo 

He might have told her, that night, that he wanted to end it, that his 
conscience no longer permitted, -- he might have been willing to face her 
rage, and to live with the paradox that a decision could be simultaneously 
conscientious and immoral (because cruel, unilateral, selfish); but when he 
entered the bedroom she grabbed his face with both hands, and watching 
closely to see how he took the news she confessed to having lied about 
contraceptive precautions. She was pregnant. It turned out she was better 
at making unilateral decisions than he, and had simply taken from him the 
child Saladin Chamcha had been unable to provide. "I wanted it," she cried 
defiantly, and at close range. "And now I'm going to have it." 
Her selfishness had pre-empted his. He discovered that he felt relieved; 
absolved of the responsibility for making and acting upon moral choices, — 
because how could he leave her now? -- he put such notions out of his head 
and allowed her, gently but with unmistakable intent, to push him 
backwards on to the bed. 

ooo 

Whether the slowly transmogrifying Saladin Chamcha was turning into some 
sort of science-fiction or horror-video mutey, some random mutation shortly 
to be naturally selected out of existence, -- or whether he was evolving into 
an avatar of the Master of Hell, -- or whatever was the case, the fact is (and 
it will be as well in the present matter to proceed cautiously, stepping from 
established fact to established fact, leaping to no conclusion until our 
yellowbrick lane of things-incontrovertibly-so has led us to within an inch or 
two of our destination) that the two daughters of Haji Sufyan had taken him 
under their wing, caring for the Beast as only Beauties can; and that, as 
time passed, he came to be extremely fond of the pair of them himself. For 
a long while Mishal and Anahita struck him as inseparable, fist and shadow, 
shot and echo, the younger girl seeking always to emulate her tall, feisty 
sibling, practising karate kicks and Wing Chun forearm smashes in flattering 
imitation of Mishal's uncompromising ways. More recently, however, he had 
noted the growth of a saddening hostility between the sisters. One evening 
at his attic window Mishal was pointing out some of the Street's characters, - 
- there, a Sikh ancient shocked by a racial attack into 



complete silence; he had not spoken, it was said, for nigh on seven years, 
before which he had been one of the city's few "black" justices of the 
peace . . . now, however, he pronounced no sentences, and was 
accompanied everywhere by a crotchety wife who treated him with 
dismissive exasperation, _0, ignore him, he never says a dicky bird_; -- and 
over there, a perfectly ordinary-looking "accountant type" (Mishal's term) on 
his way home with briefcase and box of sweetmeats; this one was known in 
the Street to have developed the strange need to rearrange his sitting-room 
furniture for half an hour each evening, placing chairs in rows interrupted by 
an aisle and pretending to be the conductor of a single-decker bus on its 
way to Bangladesh, an obsessive fantasy in which all his family were obliged 
to participate, _and after ha if an hour precisely he snaps out of it, and the 
rest of the time he's the dullest guy you could meet_; — and after some 
moments of this, fifteen-year-old Anahita broke in spitefully: "What she 
means is, you're not the only casualty, round here the freaks are two a 
penny, you only have to look." 

Mishal had developed the habit of talking about the Street as if it were a 
mythological battleground and she, on high at Chamcha's attic window, the 
recording angel and the exterminator, too. From her Chamcha learned the 
fables of the new Kurus and Pandavas, the white racists and black "self- 
help" or vigilante posses starring in this modern _Mahabharata_, or, more 
accurately, _Mahavila yet_. Up there, under the railway bridge, the National 
Front used to do battle with the fearless radicals of the Socialist Workers 
Party, "every Sunday from closing time to opening time," she sneered, 
"leaving us lot to clear up the wreckage the rest of the sodding week." -- 
Down that alley was where the Brickhall Three were done over by the police 
and then fitted up, verballed, framed; up that side-street he'd find the scene 
of the murder of the Jamaican, Ulysses E. Lee, and in that public house the 
stain on the carpet marking where Jatinder Singh Mehta breathed his last. 
"Thatcherism has its effect," she declaimed, while Chamcha, who no longer 
had the will or the words to argue with her, to speak ofjustice and the rule of 
law, watched Anahita's mounting rage. -- "No pitched battles these days," 
Mishal elucidated. "The emphasis is on small—scale enterprises and the cult 
of the individual, right? In other words, five or six white bastards murdering 
us, one individual at a time." These days the posses roamed the nocturnal 
Street, ready for aggravation. "It's our turf," said Mishal Sufyan of that 
Street without a blade of grass in sight. "Let "em come and get it if they 
can." "Look at her," Anahita burst out. "So ladylike, in"she? So refined. 
Imagine what Mum'd say if she knew." -- "If she knew what, you little grass 
— ?" But Anahita wasn't to be cowed: "O, yes," she wailed. "O, yes, we know, 
don't think we don't. How she goes to the bhangra beat shows on Sunday 
mornings and changes in the ladies into those tarty— farty clothes -- who she 
wiggles with and jiggles with at the Hot Wax daytime disco that she thinks I 
never heard of before -- what went on at that bluesdance she crept off to 



with Mister You-know-who Cockybugger -- some big sister," she produced 
her grandstand finish, "she'll probably wind up dead of wossname 
_ignorance_." Meaning, as Chamcha and Mishal well knew, -- those cinema 
commercials, expressionist tombstones rising from earth and sea, had left 
the residue of their slogan well implanted, no doubt of that -- _Aids_. 
Mishal fell upon her sister, pulling her hair, -- Anahita, in pain, was 
nevertheless able to get in another dig, "Least I didn't cut my hair into any 
weirdo pincushion, must be a flutter who fancies _that_," and the two 
departed, leaving Chamcha to wonder at Anahita's sudden and absolute 
espousal of her mother's ethic of femininity. _Trouble brewing_, he 
concluded. 

Trouble came: soon enough. 

ooo 

More and more, when he was alone, he felt the slow heaviness pushing him 
down, until he fell out of consciousness, running down like a wind-up toy, 
and in those passages of stasis that always ended just before the arrival of 
visitors his body would emit alarming noises, the howlings of infernal 
wahwah pedals, the snare--drum cracking of satanic bones. These were the 
periods in which, little by little, he grew. And as he grew, so too did the 
rumours of his presence; you can't keep a devil locked up in the attic and 
expect to keep it to yourself forever. 

How the news got out (for the people in the know remained tight-lipped, the 
Sufyans because they feared loss of business, the temporary beings because 
their feeling of evanescence had rendered them unable, for the moment, to 
act, -- and all parties because of the fear of the arrival of the police, never 
exactly reluctant to enter such establishments, bump accidentally into a little 
furniture and step by chance on a few arms legs necks): he began to appear 
to the locals in their dreams. The mullahs at the Jamme Masjid which used 
to be the Machzikel HaDath synagogue which had in its turn replaced the 
Huguenots' Calvinist church; -- and Dr. Uhuru Simba the man-mountain in 
African pill-box hat and red-yellow-black poncho who had led the successful 
protest against _The Aliens Show_ and whom Mishal Sufyan hated more 
than any other black man on account of his tendency to punch uppity 
women in the mouth, herself for example, in public, at a meeting, plenty of 
witnesses, but it didn't stop the Doctor, _he's a crazy bastard, that one_, 
she told Chamcha when she pointed him out from the attic one day, 
_capable of anything; he could've killed me, and all because I told 
everybody he wasn't no African, I knew him when he was plain Sylvester 
Roberts from down New Cross way;fucking witch doctor, if you ask me_; -- 
and Mishal herself, and Jumpy, and Hanif; -- and the Bus Conductor, too, 
they all dreamed him, rising up in the Street like Apocalypse and burning the 
town like toast. And in every one of the thousand and one dreams he, 
Saladin Chamcha, gigantic of limb and horn-turbaned of head, was singing, 
in a voice so diabolically ghastly and guttural that it proved impossible to 



identify the verses, even though the dreams turned out to have the 
terrifying quality of being serial, each one following on from the one the 
night before, and so on, night after night, until even the Silent Man, that 
former justice of the peace who had not spoken since the night in an Indian 
restaurant when a young drunk stuck a knife under his nose, threatened to 
cut him, and then committed the far more shocking offence of spitting all 
over his food, -- until this mild gentleman astounded his wife by sitting 
upright in his sleep, ducking his neck forwards like a pigeon's, clapping the 
insides of his wrists together beside his right ear, and roaring out a song at 
the top of his voice, which sounded so alien and full of static that she 
couldn't make out a word. 

Very quickly, because nothing takes a long time any more, the image of the 
dream-devil started catching on, becoming popular, it should be said, only 
amongst what Hal Valance had described as the _tinted persuasion_. While 
non-tint neo--Georgians dreamed of a suiphurous enemy crushing their 
perfectly restored residences beneath his smoking heel, nocturnal browns- 
and-blacks found themselves cheering, in their sleep, this what--else--after- 
-all--but-- black--man, maybe a little twisted up by fate class race history, 
all that, but getting off his behind, bad and mad, to kick a little ass. 
At first these dreams were private matters, but pretty soon they started 
leaking into the waking hours, as Asian retailers and manufacturers of 
button-badges sweatshirts posters understood the power of the dream, and 
then all of a sudden he was everywhere, on the chests of young girls and in 
the windows protected against bricks by metal grilles, he was a defiance and 
a warning. Sympathy for the Devil: a new lease of life for an old tune. The 
kids in the Street started wearing rubber devil—horns on their heads, the 
way they used to wear pink-and-green balls jiggling on the ends of stiff 
wires a few years previously, when they preferred to imitate spacemen. The 
symbol of the Goatman, his fist raised in might, began to crop up on 
banners at political demonstrations, Save the Six, Free the Four, Eat the 
Heinz FiftySeven. _Pleasechu meechu_, the radios sang, _hopeyu guessma 
nayym_. Police community relations officers pointed to the "growing devil- 
cult among young blacks and Asians" as a "deplorable tendency", using this 
"Satanist revival" to fight back against the allegations of Ms Pamela 
Chamcha and the local CR C: "Who are the witches now?" "Chamcha," 
Mishal said excitedly, "you're a hero. I mean, people can really identify with 
you. It's an image white society has rejected for so long that we can really 
take it, you know, occupy it, inhabit it, reclaim it and make it our own. It's 
time you considered action." 

"Go away," cried Saladin, in his bewilderment. "This isn't what I wanted. 
This is not what I meant, at all." 

"You're growing out of the attic, anyhow," rejoined Mishal, miffed. "It won't 
be big enough for you in not too long a while." 
Things were certainly coming to a head. 



0 0 0 

"Another old lady get slice las' night," announced Hanif Johnson, affecting a 
Trinidadian accent in the way he had. "No mo soshaal security for she." 
Anahita Sufyan, on duty behind the counter of the Shaandaar Cafe, banged 
cups and plates. "I don't know why you do that," she complained. "Sends 
me spare." Hanif ignored her, sat down beside Jumpy, who muttered 
absently: "What're they saying?" -- Approaching fatherhood was weighing on 
Jumpy Joshi, but Hanif slapped him on the back. "The ol 1 poetry not goin 
great, bra," he commiserated. "Look like that river of blood get coagulate." A 
look from Jumpy changed his tune. "They sayin what they say," he answered. 
"Look out for coloureds cruisin in cars. Now if she was black, man, it'd be 'No 
grounds fi suspec racial motive.' I tell you," he went on, dropping the accent, 
"sometimes the level of aggression bubbling just under the skin of this town 
gets me really scared. It's not just the damn Granny Ripper. It's everywhere. 
You bump into a guy's newspaper in a rush-hour train and you can get your 
face broken. Everybody's so goddamn angry, seems like to me. Including, 
old friend, you," he finished, noticing. Jumpy stood, excused himself, and 
walked out without an explanation. Hanif spread his arms, gave Anahita his 
most winsome smile: "What'd I do?" 

Anahita smiled back sweetly. "Dju ever think, Hanif, that maybe people don't 
like you very much?" 

When it became known that the Granny Ripper had struck again, 
suggestions that the solution to the hideous killings of old women by a 
"human fiend", -- who invariably arranged his victims' internal organs neatly 
around their corpses, one lung by each ear, and the heart, for obvious 
reasons, in the mouth, — would most likely be found by investigating the 
new occultism among the city's blacks which was giving the authorities so 
much cause for concern, -- began to be heard with growing frequency. The 
detention and interrogation of "tints" intensified accordingly, as did the 
incidence of snap raids on establishments "suspected of harbouring 
underground occultist cells". What was happening, although nobody 
admitted it or even, at first, understood, was that everyone, black brown 
white, had started thinking of the dream-figure as _real_, as a being who 
had crossed the frontier, evading the normal controls, and was now roaming 
loose about the city. Illegal migrant, outlaw king, foul criminal or race--hero, 
Saladin Chamcha was getting to be true. Stories rushed across the city in 
every direction: a physiotherapist sold a shaggy--dog tale to the Sundays, 
was not believed, but _no smoke without fire_, people said; it was a 
precarious state of affairs, and it couldn't be long before the raid on the 
Shaandaar Cafe that would send the whole thing higher than the sky. Priests 
became involved, adding another unstable element -- the linkage between 
the term _black_ and the sin _blasphemy_— to the mix. In his attic, slowly, 
Saladin Chamcha grew. 



0 0 0 

He chose Lucretius over Ovid. The inconstant soul, the mutability of 
everything, das Ich, every last speck. A being going through life can become 
so other to himself as to _be another_, discrete, severed from history. He 
thought, at times, of Zeeny Vakil on that other planet, Bombay, at the far 
rim of the galaxy: Zeeny, eclecticism, hybridity. The optimism of those ideas! 
The certainty on which they rested: of will, of choice! But, Zeeny mine, life 
just happens to you: like an accident. No: it happens to you as a result of 
your condition. Not choice, but -- at best -- process, and, at worst, shocking, 
total change. Newness: he had sought a different kind, but this was what he 
got. 

Bitterness, too, and hatred, all these coarse things. He would enter into his 
new self; he would be what he had become: loud, stenchy, hideous, outsize, 
grotesque, inhuman, powerful. He had the sense of being able to stretch out 
a little finger and topple church spires with the force growing in him, the 
anger, the anger, the anger. _Powers_. 

He was looking for someone to blame. He, too, dreamed; and in his dreams, 
a shape, a face, was floating closer, ghostly still, unclear, but one day soon 
he would be able to call it by its name. 
_I am_, he accepted, _that I am_. 
Submission. 

ooo 

His cocooned life at the Shaandaar B and B blew apart the evening Hanif 
Johnson came in shouting that they had arrested Uhuru Simba for the 
Granny Ripper murders, and the word was they were going to lay the Black 
Magic thing on him too, he was going to be the voodoo-priest baron-samedi 
fall guy, and the reprisals -- beatings--up, attacks on property, the usual -- 
were already beginning. "Lock your doors," Hanif told Sufyan and Hind. 
"There's a bad night ahead." 

Hanif was standing slap in the centre of the cafe, confident of the effect of 
the news he was bringing, so when Hind came across to him and hit him in 
the face with all her strength he was so unprepared for the blow that he 
actually fainted, more from surprise than pain. He was revived by Jumpy, 
who threw a glass of water at him the way he had been taught to do by the 
movies, but by then Hind was hurling his office equipment down into the 
street from upstairs; typewriter ribbons and red ribbons, too, the sort used 
for securing legal documents, made festive streamers in the air. Anahita 
Sufyan, unable any more to resist the demonic proddings of her jealousy, 
had told Hind about Mishal's relations with the up--and--coming lawyer- 
politico, and after that there had been no holding Hind, all the years of her 
humiliation had come pouring out of her, it wasn't enough that she was 
stuck in this country full of jews and strangers who lumped her in with the 
negroes, it wasn't enough that her husband was a weakling who performed 
the Haj but couldn't be bothered with godliness in his own home, but this 



had to happen to her also; she went at Mishal with a kitchen knife and her 
daughter responded by "unleashing a painful series of kicks and jabs, self- 
defence only, otherwise it would have been matricide for sure. -- Hanif 
regained consciousness and Haji Sufyan looked down on him, moving his 
hands in small helpless circles by his sides, weeping openly, unable to find 
consolation in learning, because whereas for most Muslims a journey to 
Mecca was the great blessing, in his case it had turned out to be the 
beginning of a curse; -- "Go," he said, "Hanif, my friend, get out," -- but 
Hanif wasn't going without having his say, _I've kept my mouth shut for too 
long_, he cried, _you people who call yourself so moral while you make 
fortunes off the misery of your own race_, whereupon it became clear that 
Haji Sufyan had never known of the prices being charged by his wife, who 
had not told him, swearing her daughters to secrecy with terrible and 
binding oaths, knowing that if he discovered he'd find a way of giving the 
money back so that they could go on rotting in poverty; -- and he, the 
twinkling familiar spirit of the Shaandaar Cafe, after that lost all love of life. - 

- And now Mishal arrived in the cafe, O the shame of a family's inner life 
being enacted thus, like a cheap drama, before the eyes of paying customers, 

— although in point of fact the last tea--drinker was hurrying from the scene 
as fast as her old legs would carry her. Mishal was carrying bags. "I'm 
leaving, too," she announced. "Try and stop me. It's only eleven days." 
When Hind saw her elder daughter on the verge of walking out of her life 
forever, she understood the price one pays for harbouring the Prince of 
Darkness under one's roof. She begged her husband to see reason, to 
realize that his good-hearted generosity had brought them into this hell, and 
that if only that devil, Chamcha, could be removed from the premises, then 
maybe they could become once again the happy and industrious family of 
old. As she finished speaking, however, the house above her head began to 
rumble and shake, and there was the noise of something coming down the 
stairs, growling and -- or so it seemed -- singing, in a voice so vilely hoarse 
that it was impossible to understand the words. 

It was Mishal who went up to meet him in the end, Mishal with Hanif 
Johnson holding her hand, while the treacherous Anahita watched from the 
foot of the stairs. Chamcha had grown to a height of over eight feet, and 
from his nostrils there emerged smoke of two different colours, yellow from 
the left, and from the right, black. He was no longer wearing clothes. His 
bodily hair had grown thick and long, his tail was swishing angrily, his eyes 
were a pale but luminous red, and he had succeeded in terrifying the entire 
temporary population of the bed and breakfast establishment to the point of 
incoherence. Mishal, however, was not too scared to talk. "Where do you 
think you're going?" she asked him. "You think you'd last five minutes out 
there, looking like you do?" Chamcha paused, looked himself over, observed 
the sizeable erection emerging from his loins, and shrugged. "I am 
considering action_," he told her, using her own phrase, although in that 



voice of lava and thunder it didn't seem to belong to her any more. "There is 
a person I wish to find." 

"Hold your horses," Mishal told him. "We'll work something out." 

ooo 

What is to be found here, one mile from the Shaandaar, here where the beat 
meets the street, at Club Hot Wax, formerly the Blak-An-Tan? On this star- 
crossed and moonless night, let us follow the figures -- some strutting, 
decked out, hot-to-trot, others surreptitious, shadow-hugging, shy -- 
converging from all quarters of the neighbourhood to dive, abruptly, 
underground, and through this unmarked door. What's within? Lights, fluids, 
powders, bodies shaking themselves, singly, in pairs, in threes, moving 
towards possibilities. But what, then, are these other figures, obscure in the 
on— off rainbow brilliance of the space, these forms frozen in their attitudes 
amid the frenzied dancers? What are these that hip-hop and hindi-pop but 
never move an inch? -- "You lookin good, Hot Wax posse!" Our host speaks: 
ranter, toaster, deejay nonpareil -- the prancing Pinkwalla, his suit of lights 
blushing to the beat. — Truly, he is exceptional, a seven— foot albino, his 
hair the palest rose, the whites of his eyes likewise, his features 
unmistakably Indian, the haughty nose, long thin lips, a face from a 
_Hamza-nama_ cloth. An Indian who has never seen India, East— India— 
man from the West Indies, white black man. A star. 
Still the motionless figures dance between the shimmying of sisters, the 
jouncing and bouncing of youth. What are they? -- Why, waxworks, nothing 
more. -- Who are they? -- History. See, here is Mary Seacole, who did as 
much in the Crimea as another magic-lamping Lady, but, being dark, could 
scarce be seen for the flame of Florence's candle; -- and, over there!, one 
Abdul Karim, aka The Munshi, whom Queen Victoria sought to promote, but 
who was done down by colour-barring ministers. They're all here, dancing 
motionlessly in hot wax: the black clown of Septimius Severus, to the right; 
to the left, George IV's barber dancing with the slave, Grace Jones. 
Ukawsaw Gronniosaw, the African prince who was sold for six feet of cloth, 
dances according to his ancient fashion with the slave's son Ignatius Sancho, 
who became in 1782 the first African writer to be published in England. -- 
The migrants of the past, as much the living dancers' ancestors as their own 
flesh and blood, gyrate stilly while Pinkwalla rants toasts raps up on the 
stage, _Now-mi-feel - indignation-when-dem-talk-immigration-when-dem- 
make-insinuation - we-no-part-a-de-nation-an-mi-make-proclamation-a-de- 
true-situation-how-we-make-contribution-since-de-Rome-Occupation_, and 
from a different part of the crowded room, bathed in evil green light, wax 
villains cower and grimace: Mosley, Powell, Edward Long, all the local 
avatars of Legree. And now a murmur begins in the belly of the Club, 
mounting, becoming a single word, chanted over and over: "Meltdown," the 
customers demand. "Meltdown, meltdown, melt." 



Pinkwalla takes his cue from the crowd, _So-it-meltdown-time-when-de- 
men-of-crime-gonna-get-in-line-for-some-hell-fi re-fr yin_, after which he 
turns to the crowd, arms wide, feet with the beat, to ask, _Who"s-it-gonna- 
be? Who-you-wanna-see?_ Names are shouted, compete, coalesce, until the 
assembled company is united once more, chanting a single word. Pinkwalla 
claps his hands. Curtains part behind him, allowing female attendants in 
shiny pink shorts and singlets to wheel out a fearsome cabinet: man--sized, 
glass-- fronted, internally—illuminated -- the microwave oven, complete with 
Hot Seat, known to Club regulars as: Hell's Kitchen. "All _right_," cries 
Pinkwalla. "Now we really cookin." 

Attendants move towards the tableau of hate-figures, pounce upon the 
night's sacrificial offering, the one most often selected, if truth be told; at 
least three times a week. Her permawaved coiffure, her pearls, her suit of 
blue. _Maggie-maggie-maggie_, bays the crowd. _Burn-burn-burn_. The doll, 
-- the _guy_, -- is strapped into the Hot Seat. Pinkwalla throws the switch. 
And O how prettily she melts, from the inside out, crumpling into 
formlessness. Then she is a puddle, and the crowd sighs its ecstasy: done. 
"The fire this time," Pinkwalla tells them. Music regains the night. 

ooo 

When Pinkwalla the deejay saw what was climbing under cover of darkness 
into the back of his panel van, which his friends Hanif and Mishal had 
persuaded him to bring round the back of the Shaandaar, the fear of obeah 
filled his heart; but there was also the contrary exhilaration of realizing that 
the potent hero of his many dreams was a flesh-and-blood actuality. He 
stood across the street, shivering under a lamp—post though it wasn't 
particularly cold, and stayed there for half an hour while Mishal and Hanif 
spoke urgently to him, _he needs somewhere to go, we have to think about 
his future_. Then he shrugged, walked over to the van, and started up the 
engine. Hanif sat beside him in the cab; Mishal travelled with Saladin, hidden 
from view. 

It was almost four in the morning when they bedded Chamcha down in the 
empty, locked-up nightclub. Pinkwalla — his real name, Sewsunker, was 
never used -- had unearthed a couple of sleeping-bags from a back room, 
and they sufficed. Hanif Johnson, saying goodnight to the fearsome entity of 
whom his lover Mishal seemed entirely unafraid, tried to talk to him 
seriously, "You've got to realize how important you could be for us, there's 
more at stake here than your personal needs," but mutant Saladin only 
snorted, yellow and black, and Hanif backed quickly away. When he was 
alone with the waxworks Chamcha was able to fix his thoughts once again 
on the face that had finally coalesced in his mind's eye, radiant, the light 
streaming out around him from a point just behind his head, Mister Perfecto, 
portrayer of gods, who always landed on his feet, was always forgiven his 
sins, loved, praised, adored . . . the face he had been trying to identify in his 
dreams, Mr. Gibreel Farishta, transformed into the simulacrum of an angel 



as surely as he was the Devil's mirror--self. Who should the Devil blame but 
the Archangel, Gibreel? 

The creature on the sleeping—bags opened its eyes; smoke began to issue 
from its pores. The face on every one of the waxwork dummies was the 
same now, Gibreel's face with its widow's peak and its long thin saturnine 
good looks. The creature bared its teeth and let out a long, foul breath, and 
the waxworks dissolved into puddles and empty clothes, all of them, every 
one. The creature lay back, satisfied. And. fixed its mind upon its foe. 
Whereupon it felt within itself the most inexplicable sensations of 
compression, suction, withdrawal; it was racked by terrible, squeezing pains, 
and emitted piercing squeals that nobody, not even Mishal who was staying 
with Hanif in Pinkwalla's apartment above the Club, dared to investigate. 
The pains mounted in intensity, and the creature thrashed and tossed 
around the dancefloor, wailing most piteously; until, at length, granted 
respite, it fell asleep. 

When Mishal, Hanif and Pinkwalla ventured into the clubroom several hours 
later, they observed a scene of frightful devastation, tables sent flying, 
chairs broken in half, and, of course, every waxwork -- good and evil -- 
Topsy and Legree -- melted like tigers into butter; and at the centre of the 
carnage, sleeping like a baby, no mythological creature at all, no iconic 
Thing of horns and hellsbreath, but Mr. Saladin Chamcha himself, apparently 
restored to his old shape, mother-naked but of entirely human aspect and 
proportions, _humanized_ -- is there any option but to conclude? -- by the 
fearsome concentration of his hate. 
He opened his eyes; which still glowed pale and red. 



2 



Alleluia Cone, coming down from Everest, saw a city of ice to the west of 
Camp Six, across the Rock Band, glittering in the sunlight below the 
massifofCho Oyu. _Shangri-La_, she momentarily thought; however, this 
was no green vale of immortality but a metropolis of gigantic ice— needles, 
thin, sharp and cold. Her attention was distracted by Sherpa Pemba warning 
her to maintain her concentration, and the city had gone when she looked 
back. She was still at twenty-seven thousand feet, but the apparition of the 
impossible city threw her back across space and time to the Bayswater study 
of old dark wooden furniture and heavy velvet curtains in which her father 
Otto Cone, the art historian and biographer of Picabia, had spoken to her in 
her fourteenth and his final year of "the most dangerous of all the lies we 
are fed in our lives", which was, in his opinion, the idea of the continuum. 
"Anybody ever tries to tell you how this most beautiful and most evil of 
planets is somehow homogeneous, composed only of reconcilable elements, 
that it all _adds up_, you get on the phone to the straitjacket tailor," he 



advised her, managing to give the impression of having visited more planets 
than one before coming to his conclusions. "The world is incompatible, just 
never forget it: gaga. Ghosts, Nazis, saints, all alive at the same time; in 
one spot, blissful happiness, while down the road, the inferno. You can't ask 
for a wilder place." Ice cities on the roof of the world wouldn't have fazed 
Otto. Like his wife Alicja, Allie's mother, he was a Polish emigre, a survivor 
of a wartime prison camp whose name was never mentioned throughout 
Allie's childhood. "He wanted to make it as if it had not been," Alicja told her 
daughter later. "He was unrealistic in many ways. But a good man; the best 
I knew." She smiled an inward smile as she spoke, tolerating him in memory 
as she had not always managed to during his life, when he was frequently 
appalling. For example: he developed a hatred of communism which drove 
him to embarrassing extremes of behaviour, notably at Christmas, when this 
Jewish man insisted on celebrating with his Jewish family and others what he 
described as "an English rite", as a mark of respect to their new "host 
nation" -- and then spoiled it all (in his wife's eyes) by bursting into the 
salon where the assembled company was relaxing in the glow of log fire, 
Christmas tree lights and brandy, got up in pantomime Chinee, with droopy 
moustaches and all, crying: "Father Christmas is dead! I have killed him! I 
am The Mao: no presents for anyone! Hee! Hee! Hee!" Allie on Everest, 
remembering, winced -- her mother's wince, she realized, transferred to her 
frosted face. 

The incompatibility of life's elements: in a tent at Camp Four, 27,600 feet, 
the idea which seemed at times to be her father's daemon sounded banal, 
emptied of meaning, of _atmosphere_, by the altitude. "Everest silences 
you," she confessed to Gibreel Far-- ishta in a bed above which parachute 
silk formed a canopy of hollow Himalayas. "When you come down, nothing 
seems worth saying, nothing at all. You find the nothingness wrapping you 
up, like a sound. Non-being. You can't keep it up, of course. The world 
rushes in soon enough. What shuts you up is, I think, the sight you've had 
of perfection: why speak if you can't manage perfect thoughts, perfect 
sentences? It feels like a betrayal of what you've been through. But it fades; 
you accept that certain compromises, closures, are required if you're to 
continue." They spent most of their time in bed during their first weeks 
together: the appetite of each for the other seemingly inexhaustible, they 
made love six or seven times a day. "You opened me up," she told him. "You 
with the ham in your mouth. It was exactly as if you were speaking to me, 
as if I could read your thoughts. Not as if," she amended. "I did read them, 
right?" He nodded: it was true. "I read your thoughts and the right words 
just came out of my mouth," she marvelled. "Just flowed out. Bingo: love. In 
the beginning was the word." 

Her mother took a fatalistic view of this dramatic turn of events in Allie's life, 
the return of a lover from beyond the grave. "I'll tell you what I honestly 
thought when you gave me the news," she said over lunchtime soup and 



kreplach at the Whitechapel Bloom's. "I thought, oh dear, it's grand passion; 
poor Allie has to go through this now, the unfortunate child." Alicja's 
strategy was to keep her emotions strictly under control. She was a tall, 
ample woman with a sensual mouth but, as she put it, "I've never been a 
noise—maker." She was frank with Allie about her sexual passivity, and 
revealed that Otto had been, "Let's say, otherwise inclined. He had a 
weakness for grand passion, but it always made him so miserable I could 
not get worked up about it." She had been reassured by her knowledge that 
the women with whom her little, bald, jumpy husband consorted were "her 
type", big and buxom, "except they were brassy, too: they did what he 
wanted, shouting things out to spur him on, pretending for all they were 
worth; it was his enthusiasm they responded to, I think, and maybe his 
chequebook, too. He was of the old school and gave generous gifts." 
Otto had called Alleluia his "pearl without price", and dreamed for her a 
great future, as maybe a concert pianist or, failing that, a Muse. "Your sister, 
frankly, is a disappointment to me," he said three weeks before his death in 
that study of Great Books and Picabian bric-a-brac -- a stuffed monkey 
which he claimed was a "first draft" of the notorious _Portrait of Cezanne, 
Portrait of Rembrandt, Portrait of Renoir_, numerous mechanical 
contraptions including sexual stimulators that delivered small electric shocks, 
and a first edition of Jarry's _Ubu Roi_. "Elena has wants where she should 
have thoughts." He Anglicized the name -- Yelyena into Ellaynah --just as it 
had been his idea to reduce "Alleluia" to Allie and bowdlerize himself, Cohen 
from Warsaw, into Cone. Echoes of the past distressed him; he read no 
Polish literature, turning his back on Herbert, on Milosz, on "younger fellows" 
like Baranczak, because for him the language was irredeemably polluted by 
history. "I am English now," he would say proudly in his thick East European 
accent. "Silly mid-offl Pish-Tush! Widow of Windsor! Bugger all." In spite of 
his reticences he seemed content enough being a pantomime member of the 
English gentry. In retrospect, though, it looked likely that he'd been only too 
aware of the fragility of the performance, keeping the heavy drapes almost 
permanently drawn in case the inconsistency of things caused him to see 
monsters out there, or moonscapes instead of the familiar Moscow Road. 
"He was strictly a melting— pot man," Alicja said while attacking a large 
helping of tsimmis. "When he changed our name I told him, Otto, it isn't 
required, this isn't America, it's London W-- two; but he wanted to wipe the 
slate clean, even his Jewishness, excuse me but I know. The fights with the 
Board of Deputies! All very civilized, parliamentary language throughout, but 
bareknuckle stuff none the less." After his death she went straight back to 
Cohen, the synagogue, Chanukah and Bloom's. "No more imitation of life," 
she munched, and waved a sudden, distracted fork. "That picture. I was 
crazy for it. Lana Turner, am I right? And Mahalia Jackson singing in a 
church." 



Otto Cone as a man of seventy-plus jumped into an empty lift-shaft and died. 
Now there was a subject which Alicja, who would readily discuss most taboo 
matters, refused to touch upon: why does a survivor of the camps live forty 
years and then complete the job the monsters didn't get done? Does great 
evil eventually triumph, no matter how strenuously it is resisted? Does it 
leave a sliver of ice in the blood, working its way through until it hits the 
heart? Or, worse: can a man's death be incompatible with his life? Allie, 
whose first response on learning of her father's death had been fury, flung 
such questions as these at her mother. Who, stonefaced beneath a wide 
black hat, said only: "You have inherited his lack of restraint, my dear." 
After Otto's death Alicja ditched the elegant high style of dress and gesture 
which had been her offering on the altar of his lust for integration, her 
attempt to be his Cecil Beaton grande dame. "Phoo," she confided in Allie, 
"what a relief, my dear, to be shapeless for a change." She now wore her 
grey hair in a straggly bun, put on a succession of identical floral-print 
supermarket dresses, abandoned make-up, got herself a painful set of false 
teeth, planted vegetables in what Otto had insisted should be an English 
floral garden (neat flowerbeds around the central, symbolic tree, a 
"chimeran graft" of laburnum and broom) and gave, instead of dinners full of 
cerebral chat, a series of lunches -- heavy stews and a minimum of three 
outrageous puddings -- at which dissident Hungarian poets told convoluted 
jokes to Gurdjieffian mystics, or (if things didn't quite work out) the guests 
sat on cushions on the floor, staring gloomily at their loaded plates, and 
something very like total silence reigned for what felt like weeks. Allie 
eventually turned away from these Sunday afternoon rituals, sulking in her 
room until she was old enough to move out, with Alicja's ready assent, and 
from the path chosen for her by the father whose betrayal of his own act of 
survival had angered her so much. She turned towards action; and found 
she had mountains to climb. 

Alicja Cohen, who had found Allie's change of course perfectly 
comprehensible, even laudable, and rooted for her all the way, could not 
(she admitted over coffee) quite see her daughter's point in the matter of 
Gibreel Farishta, the revenant Indian movie star. "To hear you talk, dear, 
the man's not in your league," she said, using a phrase she believed to be 
synonymous with _not your type_, and which she would have been horrified 
to hear described as a racial, or religious, slur: which was inevitably the 
sense in which her daughter understood it. "That's just fine by me," Allie 
riposted with spirit, and rose. "The fact is, I don't even like my league." 
Her feet ached, obliging her to limp, rather than storm, from the restaurant. 
"Grand passion," she could hear her mother behind her back announcing 
loudly to the room at large. "The gift of tongues; means a girl can babble 
out any blasted thing." 

ooo 



Certain aspects of her education had been unaccountably neglected. One 
Sunday not long after her father's death she was buying the Sunday papers 
from the corner kiosk when the vendor announced: "It's the last wek this 
week. Twenty— three years I've been on this corner and the Pakis have 
finally driven me out of business." She heard the word _p-a-c-h-y_, and had 
a bizarre vision of elephants lumbering down the Moscow Road, flattening 
Sunday news vendors. "What's a pachy?" she foolishly asked and the reply 
was stinging: "A brown Jew." She went on thinking of the proprietors of the 
local "C TN" (confectioner—tobacconist-- newsagent) as _pach yderms_ for 
quite a while: as people set apart -- rendered objectionable -- by the nature 
of their skin. She told Gibreel this story, too. "Oh," he responded, crushingly, 
"an elephant joke." He wasn't an easy man. 

But there he was in her bed, this big vulgar fellow for whom she could open 
as she had never opened before; he could reach right into her chest and 
caress her heart. Not for many years had she entered the sexual arena with 
such celerity, and never before had so swift a liaison remained wholly 
untainted by regret or self— disgust. His extended silence (she took it for 
that until she learned that his name was on the _Bostan"s_ passenger list) 
had been sharply painful, suggesting a difference in his estimation of their 
encounter; but to have been mistaken about his desire, about such an 
abandoned, hurtling thing, was surely impossible? The news of his death 
accordingly provoked a double response: on the one hand, there was a kind 
of grateful, relieved joy to be had from the knowledge that he had been 
racing across the world to surprise her, that he had given up his entire life in 
order to construct a new one with her; while, on the other, there was the 
hollow grief of being deprived of him in the very moment of knowing that 
she truly had been loved. Later, she became aware of a further, less 
generous, reaction. What had he thought he was doing, planning to arrive 
without a word of warning on her doorstep, assuming that she'd be waiting 
with open arms, an unencumbered life, and no doubt a large enough 
apartment for them both? It was the kind of behaviour one would expect of 
a spoiled movie actor who expects his desires simply to fall like ripe fruits 
into his lap . . . in short, she had felt invaded, or potentially invaded. But 
then she had rebuked herself, pushing such notions back down into the pit 
where they belonged, because after all Gibreel had paid heavily for his 
presumption, if presumption it was. A dead lover deserves the benefit of the 
doubt. 

Then there he lay at her feet, unconscious in the snow, taking her breath 
away with the impossibility of his being there at all, leading her momentarily 
to wonder if he might not be another in the series of visual aberrations -- 
she preferred the neutral phrase to the more loaded _visions_ -- by which 
she'd been plagued ever since her decision to scorn oxygen cylinders and 
conquer Chomolungma on lung power alone. The effort of raising him, 
slinging his arm around her shoulders and half-carrying him to her flat -- 



more than half, if the truth be told -- fully persuaded her that he was no 
chimera, but heavy flesh and blood. Her feet stung her all the way home, 
and the pain reawakened all the resentments she'd stifled when she thought 
him dead. What was she supposed to do with him now, the lummox, 
sprawled out across her bed? God, but she'd forgotten what a sprawler the 
man was, how during the night he colonized your side of the bed and 
denuded you entirely of bedclothes. But other sentiments, too, had re- 
emerged, and these won the day; for here he was, sleeping beneath her 
protection, the abandoned hope: at long last, love. 
He slept almost round the clock for a week, waking up only to satisfy the 
minimum requirements of hunger and hygiene, saying almost nothing. His 
sleep was tormented: he thrashed about the bed, and words occasionally 
escaped his lips: _Jahilia, Al-Lat, Hind_. In his waking moments he appeared 
to wish to resist sleep, but it claimed him, waves of it rolling over him and 
drowning him while he, almost piteously, waved a feeble arm. She was 
unable to guess what traumatic events might have given rise to such 
behaviour, and, feeling a little alarmed, telephoned her mother. Alicja 
arrived to inspect the sleeping Gibreel, pursed her lips, and pronounced: 
"He's a man possessed." She had receded more and more into a kind of 
Singer Brothers dybbukery, and her mysticism never failed to exasperate 
her pragmatic, mountain— climbing daughter. "Use maybe a suction pump 
on his ear," Alicja recommended. "That's the exit these creatures prefer." 
Allie shepherded her mother out of the door. "Thanks a lot," she said. "I'll let 
you know." 

On the seventh day he came wide awake, eyes popping open like a doll's, 
and instantly reached for her. The crudity of the approach made her laugh 
almost as much as its unexpectedness, but once again there was that feeling 
of naturalness, of Tightness; she grinned, "Okay, you asked for it," and 
slipped out of the baggy, elasticated maroon pantaloons and loose jacket — 
she disliked clothes that revealed the contours of her body -- and that was 
the beginning of the sexual marathon that left them both sore, happy and 
exhausted when it finally ground to a halt. 

He told her: he fell from the sky and lived. She took a deep breath and 
believed him, because of her father's faith in the myriad and contradictory 
possibilities of life, and because, too, of what the mountain had taught her. 
"Okay," she said, exhaling. "I'll buy it. Just don't tell my mother, all right?" 
The universe was a place of wonders, and only habituation, the anaesthesia 
of the everyday, dulled our sight. She had read, a couple of days back, that 
as part of their natural processes of combustion, the stars in the skies 
crushed carbon into diamonds. The idea of the stars raining diamonds into 
the void: that sounded like a miracle, too. If that could happen, so could this. 
Babies fell out of zillionthfloor windows and bounced. There was a scene 
about that in Francois Truffaut's movie _L"Argent du Poche_ . . . She 



focused her thoughts. "Sometimes," she decided to say, "wonderful things 
happen to me, too." 

She told him then what she had never told any living being: about the 
visions on Everest, the angels and the ice--city. "It wasn't only on Everest, 
either," she said, and continued after a hesitation. When she got back to 
London, she went for a walk along the Embankment to try and get him, as 
well as the mountain, out of her blood. It was early in the morning and there 
was the ghost of a mist and the thick snow made everything vague. Then 
the icebergs came. 

There were ten of them, moving in stately single file upriver. The mist was 
thicker around them, so it wasn't until they sailed right up to her that she 
understood their shapes, the precisely miniaturized configurations of the ten 
highest mountains in the world, in ascending order, with her mountain, 
_the_ mountain bringing up the rear. She was trying to work out how the 
icebergs had managed to pass under the bridges across the river when the 
mist thickened, and then, a few instants later, dissolved entirely, taking the 
icebergs with it. "But they were there," she insisted to Gibreel. "Nanga 
Parbat, Dhaulagiri, Xixabangma Feng." .He didn't argue. "If you say it, then 
I know it truly was so." 

An iceberg is water striving to be land; a mountain, especially a Himalaya, 
especially Everest, is land's attempt to metamorphose into sky; it is 
grounded flight, the earth mutated -- nearly -- into air, and become, in the 
true sense, exalted. Long before she ever encountered the mountain, Allie 
was aware of its brooding presence in her soul. Her apartment was full of 
Himalayas. Representations of Everest in cork, in plastic, in tile, stone, 
acrylics, brick jostled for space; there was even one sculpted entirely out of 
ice, a tiny berg which she kept in the freezer and brought out from time to 
time to show off to friends. Why so many? _Because_ -- no other possible 
answer -- _they were there_. "Look," she said, stretching out a hand without 
leaving the bed and picking up, from her bedside table, her newest 
acquisition, a simple Everest in weathered pine. "A gift from the sherpas of 
Namche Bazar." Gibreel took it, turned it in his hands. Pemba had offered it 
to her shyly when they said goodbye, insisting it was from all the sherpas as 
a group, although it was evident that he'd whittled it himself. It was a 
detailed model, complete with the ice fall and the Hillary Step that is the last 
great obstacle on the way to the top, and the route they had taken to the 
summit was scored deeply into the wood. When Gibreel turned it upside 
down he found a message, scratched into the base in painstaking English. 
_To AN Bibi. We were luck. Not to try again_. 

What Allie did not tell Gibreel was that the sherpa's prohibition had scared 
her, convincing her that if she ever set her foot again upon the goddess- 
mountain, she would surely die, because it is not permitted to mortals to 
look more than once upon the face of the divine; but the mountain was 
diabolic as well as transcendent, or, rather, its diabolism and its 



ranscendence were one, so that even the contemplation of Pemba's ban 
made her feel a pang of need so deep that it made her groan aloud, as if in 
sexual ecstasy or despair. "The Himalayas," she told Gibreel so as not to say 
what was really on her mind, "are emotional peaks as well as physical ones: 
like opera. That's what makes them so awesome. Nothing but the giddiest 
heights. A hard trick to pull off, though." Allie had a way of switching from 
the concrete to the abstract, a trope so casually achieved as to leave the 
listener half-- wondering if she knew the difference between the two; or, 
very often, unsure as to whether, finally, such a difference could be said to 
exist. 

Allie kept to herself the knowledge that she must placate the mountain or 
die, that in spite of the flat feet which made any serious mountaineering out 
of the question she was still infected by Everest, and that in her heart of 
hearts she kept hidden an impossible scheme, the fatal vision of Maurice 
Wilson, never achieved to this day. That is: the solo ascent. 
What she did not confess: that she had seen Maurice Wilson since her return 
to London, sitting among the chimneypots, a beckoning goblin in plus-fours 
and tam-o"-shanter hat. -- Nor did Gibreel Farishta tell her about his pursuit 
by the spectre of Rekha Merchant. There were still closed doors between 
them for all their physical intimacy: each kept secret a dangerous ghost. -- 
And Gibreel, on hearing of Allie's other visions, concealed a great agitation 
behind his neutral words -- _if you say it, then I know_ -- an agitation born 
of this further evidence that the world of dreams was leaking into that of the 
waking hours, that the seals dividing the two were breaking, and that at any 
moment the two firmaments could be joined, -- that is to say, the end of all 
things was near. One morning Allie, awaking from spent and dreamless 
sleep, found him immersed in her long-unopened copy of Blake's _Marriage 
of Heaven and Hell_, in which her younger self, disrespectful of books, had 
made a number of marks: underlinings, ticks in the margins, exclamations, 
multiple queries. Seeing that she had awoken, he read out a selection of 
these passages with a wicked grin. "From the Proverbs of Hell," he began. 
"_The lust of the goat is the bounty of God_." She blushed furiously. "And 
what is more," he continued, "_The ancient tradition that the world will be 
consumed in fire at the end of six thousand years is true, as I have heard 
from Hell_. Then, lower down the page: _This will come to pass by an 
improvement of sensual enjoyment_. Tell me, who is this? I found her 
pressed in the pages." He handed her a dead woman's photograph: her 
sister, Elena, buried here and forgotten. Another addict of visions; and a 
casualty of the habit. "We don't talk about her much." She was kneeling 
unclothed on the bed, her pale hair hiding her face. "Put her back where you 
found her." 

_I saw no God, nor heard any, in a finite organical perception; but my 
senses discover'd the infinite in every thing_. He riffled on through the book, 
and replaced Elena Cone next to the image of the Regenerated Man, sitting 



naked and splay-legged on a hill with the sun shining out of his rear end. _I 
have always found that Angels have the vanity to speak of themselves as 
the only wise_. Allie put her hands up and covered her face. Gibreel tried to 
cheer her up. "You have written in the flyleaf: 'Creation of world acc. Arch-- 
bish. Usher, 4004 BC. Estim'd date of apocalypse, 1996.' So time for 
improvement of sensual enjoyment still remains." She shook her head: stop. 
He stopped. "Tell me," he said, putting away the book. 

ooo 

Elena at twenty had taken London by storm. Her feral six-foot body winking 
through a golden chain-mail Rabanne. She had always carried herself with 
uncanny assurance, proclaiming her ownership of the earth. The city was her 
medium, she could swim in it like a fish. She was dead at twenty-one, 
drowned in a bathtub of cold water, her body full of psychotropic drugs. Can 
one drown in one's element, Allie had wondered long ago. If fish can drown 
in water, can human beings suffocate in air? In those days Allie, eighteen-- 
nineteen, had envied Elena her certainties. What was her element? In what 
periodic table of the spirit could it be found? — Now, flat-footed, Himalayan 
veteran, she mourned its loss. When you have earned the high horizon it 
isn't easy to go back into your box, into a narrow island, an eternity of 
anticlimax. But her feet were traitors and the mountain would kill. 
Mythological Elena, the cover girl, wrapped in couture plastics, had been 
sure of her immortality. Allie, visiting her in her World's End crashpad, 
refused a proffered sugar-lump, mumbled something about brain damage, 
feeling inadequate, as usual in Elena's company. Her sister's face, the eyes 
too wide apart, the chin too sharp, the effect overwhelming, stared 
mockingly back. "No shortage of brain cells," Elena said. "You can spare a 
few." The spare capacity of the brain was Elena's capital. She spent her cells 
like money, searching for her own heights; trying, in the idiom of the day, to 
fly. Death, like life, came to her coated in sugar. 

She had tried to "improve" the younger Alleluia. "Hey, you're a great looking 
kid, why hide it in those dungarees? I mean, God, darling, you've got all the 
equipment in there." One night she dressed Allie up, in an olive-green item 
composed of frills and absences that barely covered her body-stockinged 
groin: _sugaring me like candy_, was Allie's puritanical thought, _my own 
sister putting me on display in the shop-window, thanks a lot_. They went to 
a gaming club full of ecstatic lordlings, and Allie had left fast when Elena's 
attention was elsewhere. A week later, ashamed of herself for being such a 
coward, for rejecting her sister's attempt at intimacy, she sat on a beanbag 
at World's End and confessed to Elena that she was no longer a virgin. 
Whereupon her elder sister slapped her in the mouth and called her ancient 
names: tramp, slut, tart. "Elena Cone never allows a man to lay a _finger_," 
she yelled, revealing her ability to think of herself as a third person, "not a 
goddamn fingernail. I know what I'm worth, darling, I know how the 
mystery dies the moment they put their willies in, I should have known 



you'd turn out to be a whore. Some fucking communist, I suppose," she 
wound down. She had inherited her father's prejudices in such matters. Allie, 
as Elena knew, had not. 

They hadn't met much after that, Elena remaining until her death the virgin 
queen of the city — the post-mortem confirmed her as _virgo intacta_ -- 
while Allie gave up wearing underwear, took odd jobs on small, angry 
magazines, and because her sister was untouchable she became the other 
thing, every sexual act a slap in her sibling's glowering, whitelipped face. 
Three abortions in two years and the belated knowledge that her days on 
the contraceptive pill had put her, as far as cancer was concerned, in one of 
the highest-risk categories of all. 

She heard about her sister's end from a newsstand billboard, MODEU'S 
"ACID BATH" DEATH. You're not even safe from puns when you die, was her 
first reaction. Then she found she was unable to weep. 
"I kept seeing her in magazines for months," she told Gibreel. "On account 
of the glossies' long lead times." Elena's corpse danced across Moroccan 
deserts, clad only in diaphanous veils; or it was sighted in the Sea of 
Shadows on the moon, naked except for spaceman's helmet and half a 
dozen silk ties knotted around breasts and groin. Allie took to drawing 
moustaches on the pictures, to the outrage of newsagents; she ripped her 
late sister out of the journals of her zombie-like undeath and crumpled her 
up. Haunted by Elena's periodical ghost, Allie reflected on the dangers of 
attempting to _fly_; what flaming falls, what macabre hells were reserved 
for such Icarus types! She came to think of Elena as a soul in torment, to 
believe that this captivity in an immobile world of girlie calendars in which 
she wore black breasts of moulded plastic, three sizes larger than her own; 
of pseudo-erotic snarls; of advertising messages printed across her navel, 
was no less than Elena's personal hell. Allie began to see the scream in her 
sister's eyes, the anguish of being trapped forever in those fashion spreads. 
Elena was being tortured by demons, consumed in fires, and she couldn't 
even move.. . after a time Allie had to avoid the shops in which her sister 
could be found staring from the racks. She lost the ability to open magazines, 
and hid all the pictures of Elena she owned. "Goodbye, Yel," she told her 
sister's memory, using her old nursery name. "I've got to look away from 
you." 

"But I turned out to be like her, after all." Mountains had begun to sing to 
her; whereupon she, too, had risked brain cells in search of exaltation. 
Eminent physicians expert in the problems facing mountaineers had 
frequently proved, beyond reasonable doubt, that human beings could not 
survive without breathing apparatus much above eight thousand metres. 
The eyes would haemorrhage beyond hope of repair, and the brain, too, 
would start to explode, losing cells by the billion, too many and too fast, 
resulting in the permanent damage known as High Altitude Deterioration, 
followed in quick time by death. Blind corpses would remain preserved in the 



permafrost of those highest slopes. But Allie and Sherpa Pemba went up and 
came down to tell the talc. Cells from the brain's deposit boxes replaced the 
current-- account casualties. Nor did her eyes blow out. Why had the 
scientists been wrong? "Prejudice, mostly," Allie said, lying curled around 
Gibreel beneath parachute silk. "They can't quantify the will, so they leave it 
out of their calculations. But it's will that gets you up Everest, will and anger, 
and it can bend any law of nature you care to mention, at least in the short 
term, gravity not excluded. If you don't push your luck, anyway." 
There had been some damage. She had been suffering unaccountable lapses 
of memory: small, unpredictable things. Once at the fishmonger's she had 
forgotten the word _fish_. Another morning she found herself in her 
bathroom picking up a toothbrush blankly, quite unable to work out its 
purpose. And one morning, waking up beside the sleeping Gibreel, she had 
been on the verge of shaking him awake to demand, "Who the hell are you? 
How did you get in my bed?" -- when, just in time, the memory returned. 
"I'm hoping it's temporary," she told him. But kept to herself, even now, the 
appearances of Maurice Wilson's ghost on the rooftops surrounding the 
Fields, waving his inviting arm. 

ooo 

She was a competent woman, formidable in many ways: very much the 
professional sportswoman of the 1980s, a client of the giant MacMurray 
public relations agency, sponsored to the gills. Nowadays she, too, appeared 
in advertisements, promoting her own range of outdoor products and 
leisurewear, aimed at holidaymakers and amateurs more than pro climbers, 
to maximize what Hal Valance would have called the universe. She was the 
golden girl from the roof of the world, the survivor of "my Teutonic 
twosome", as Otto Cone had been fond of calling his daughters. _Once again, 
Yel, I follow in your footsteps_. To be an attractive woman in a sport 
dominated by, well, hairy men was to be saleable, and the "icequeen" image 
didn't hurt either. There was money in it, and now that she was old enough 
to compromise her old, fiery ideals with no more than a shrug and a laugh, 
she was ready to make it, ready, even, to appear on TV talk-shows to fend 
off, with risque hints, the inevitable and unchanging questions about life with 
the boys at twenty-odd thousand feet. Such highprofile capers sat uneasily 
alongside the view of herself to which she still fiercely clung: the idea that 
she was a natural solitary, the most private of women, and that the 
demands of her business life were ripping her in half. She had her first fight 
with Gibreel over this, because he said, in his unvarnished way: "I guess it's 
okay to run from the cameras as long as you know they're chasing after you. 
But suppose they stop? My guess is you'd turn and run the other way." Later, 
when they'd made up, she teased him with her growing stardom (since she 
became the first sexually attractive blonde to conquer Everest, the noise had 
increased considerably, she received photographs of gorgeous hunks in the 
mail, also invitations to high life soirees and a quantity of insane abuse): "I 



could be in movies myself now that you've retired. Who knows? Maybe I 
will." To which he responded, shocking her by the force of his words, "Over 
my goddamn dead body." 

In spite of her pragmatic willingness to enter the polluted waters of the real 
and swim in the general direction of the current, she never lost the sense 
that some awful disaster was lurking just around the corner -- a legacy, this, 
of her father's and sister's sudden deaths. This hairs-on-neck prickliness had 
made her a cautious climber, a "real percentage man", as the lads would 
have it, and as admired friends died on various mountains her caution 
increased. Away from mountaineering, it gave her, at times, an unrelaxed 
look, a jumpiness; she acquired the heavily defended air of a fortress 
preparing for an inevitable assault. This added to her reputation as a frosty 
berg of a woman; people kept their distance, and, to hear her tell it, she 
accepted loneliness as the price of solitude. -- But there were more 
contradictions here, for she had, after all, only recently thrown caution 
overboard when she chose to make the final assault on Everest without 
oxygen. "Aside from all the other implications," the agency assured her in its 
formal letter of congratulations, "this humanizes you, it shows you've got 
that what--the--hell streak, and that's a positive new dimension." They were 
working on it. In the meantime, Allie thought, smiling at Gibreel in tired 
encouragement as he slipped down towards her lower depths, There's now 
you. Almost a total stranger and here you've gone and moved right in. God, 
I even carried you across the threshold, near as makes no difference. Can't 
blame you for accepting the lift. 

He wasn't housetrained. Used to servants, he left clothes, crumbs, used tea- 
bags where they fell. Worse: he _dropped_ them, actually let them fall 
where they would need picking up; perfectly, richly unconscious of what he 
was doing, he went on proving to himself that he, the poor boy from the 
streets, no longer needed to tidy up after himself. It wasn't the only thing 
about him that drove her crazy. She'd pour glasses of wine; he'd drink his 
fast and then, when she wasn't looking, grab hers, placating her with an 
angelic— faced, ultra—innocent "Plenty more, isn't it?" His bad behaviour 
around the house. He liked to fart. He complained — actually complained, 
after she'd literally scooped him out of the snow! -- about the smallness of 
the accommodations. "Every time I take two steps my face hits a wall." He 
was rude to telephone callers, _really_ rude, without bothering to find out 
who they were: automatically, the way film stars were in Bombay when, by 
some chance, there wasn't a flunkey available to protect them from such 
intrusions. After Alicja had weathered one such volley of obscene abuse, she 
said (when her daughter finally got on the end of the phone): "Excuse me 
for mentioning, darling, but your boyfriend is in my opinion a case." 
"A case, mother?" This drew out Alicja's grandest voice. She was still 
capable of grandeur, had a gift for it, in spite of her postOtto decision to 
disguise herself as a bag-lady. "A case," she announced, taking into 



consideration the fact that Gibreel was an Indian import, "of cashew and 
monkey nuts." 

Allie didn't argue with her mother, being by no means certain that she could 
continue to live with Gibreel, even if he had crossed the earth, even if he 
had fallen from the sky. The long term was hard to predict; even the 
medium term looked cloudy. For the moment, she concentrated on trying to 
get to know this man who had just assumed, right off, that he was the great 
love of her life, with a lack of doubt that meant he was either right or off his 
head. There were plenty of difficult moments. She didn't know what he knew, 
what she could take for granted: she tried, once, referring to Nabokov's 
doomed chess-player Luzhin, who came to feel that in life as in chess there 
were certain combinations that would inevitably arise to defeat him, as a 
way of explaining by analogy her own (in fact somewhat different) sense of 
impending catastrophe (which had to do not with recurring patterns but with 
the inescapability of the unforeseeable), but he fixed her with a hurt stare 
that told her he'd never heard of the writer, let alone The Defence. 
Conversely, he surprised her by asking, oUt of the blue, "Why Picabia?" 
Adding that it was peculiar, was it not, for Otto Cohen, a veteran of the 
terror camps, to go in for all that neo-Fascistic love of machinery, brute 
power, dehumanization glorified. "Anybody who's spent any time with 
machines at all," he added, "and baby, that's us all, knows first and 
foremost there's only one thing certain about them, computer or bicycle. 
They go wrong." Where did you find out about, she began, and faltered 
because she didn't like the patronizing note she was striking, but he 
answered without vanity. The first time he'd heard about Marinetti, he said, 
he'd got the wrong end of the stick and thought Futurism was something to 
do with puppets. "Marionettes, kathputli, at that time I was keen to use 
advanced puppetry techniques in a picture, maybe to depict demons or other 
supernormal beings. So I got a book." _I got a book_: Gibreel the autodidact 
made it sound like an injection. To a girl from a house that revered books -- 
her father had made them all kiss any volume that fell by chance to the floor 
-- and who had reacted by treating them badly, ripping out pages she 
wanted or didn't like, scribbling and scratching at them to show them who 
was boss, Gibreel's form of irreverence, non-abusive, taking books for what 
they offered without feeling the need to genuflect or destroy, was something 
new; and, she accepted, pleasing. She learned from him. He, however, 
seemed impervious to any wisdom she might wish to impart, about, for 
example, the correct place in which to dispose of dirty socks. When she 
attempted to suggest he "did his share", he went into a profound, injured 
sulk, expecting to be cajoled back into a good humour. Which, to her disgust, 
she found herself willing, for the moment at any rate, to do. 
The worst thing about him, she tentatively concluded, was his genius for 
thinking himself slighted, belittled, under attack. It became almost 
impossible to mention anything to him, no matter how reasonable, no 



matter how gently put. "Go, go, eat air," he'd shout, and retire into the tent 
of his wounded pride. -- And the most seductive thing about him was the 
way he knew instinctively what she wanted, how when he chose he could 
become the agent of her secret heart. As a result, their sex was literally 
electric. That first tiny spark, on the occasion of their inaugural kiss, wasn't 
any one-off. It went on happening, and sometimes while they made love she 
was convinced she could hear the crackle of electricity all around them; she 
felt, at times, her hair standing on end. "It reminds me of the electric dildo 
in my father's study," she told Gibreel, and they laughed. "Am I the love of 
your life?" she asked quickly, and he answered, just as quickly: "Of course." 
She admitted to him early on that the rumours about her unattainability, 
even frigidity, had some basis in fact. "After Yel died, I took on that side of 
her as well." She hadn't needed, any more, to hurl lovers into her sister's 
face. "Plus I really wasn't enjoying it any more. It was mostly revolutionary 
socialists at the time, making do with me while they dreamed about the 
heroic women they'd seen on their three-week trips to Cuba. Never touched 
them, of course; the combat fatigues and ideological purity scared them silly. 
They came home humming 'Guantanamera' and rang me up." She opted out. 
"I thought, let the best minds of my generation soliloquize about power over 
some other poor woman's body, I'm off." She began climbing mountains, 
she used to say when she began, "because I knew they'd never follow me up 
there. But then I thought, bulishit. I didn't do it for them; I did it for me." 
For an hour every evening she would run barefoot up and down the stairs to 
the street, on her toes, for the sake of her fallen arches. Then she'd collapse 
into a heap of cushions, looking enraged, and he'd flap helplessly around, 
usually ending up pouring her a stiff drink: Irish whiskey, mostly. She had 
begun drinking a fair bit as the reality of her foot problem sank in. ("For 
Christ's sake keep the feet quiet," a voice from the PR agency told her 
surreally on the phone. "If they get out it's finito, curtains, sayonara, go 
home, goodnight.") On their twenty-first night together, when she had 
worked her way through five doubles of Jameson's, she said: "Why I really 
went up there. Don't laugh: to escape from good and evil." He didn't laugh. 
"Are mountains above morality, in your estimation?" he asked seriously. 
"This's what I learned in the revolution," she went on. "This thing: 
information got abolished sometime in the twentieth century, can't say just 
when; stands to reason, that's part of the information that got aboish, 
abo_lished_. Since then we've been living in a fairy—story. Got me? 
Everything happens by magic. Us fairies haven't a fucking notion what's 
going on. So how do we know if it's right or wrong? We don't even know 
what it is. So what I thought was, you can either break your heart trying to 
work it all out, or you can go sit on a mountain, because that's where all the 
truth went, believe it or not, it just upped and ran away from these cities 
where even the stuff under our feet is all made up, a lie, and it hid up there 
in the thin thin air where the liars don't dare come after it in case their 



brains explode. It's up there all right. I've been there. Ask me." She fell 
asleep; he carried her to the bed. 

After the news of his death in the plane crash reached her, she had 
tormented herself by inventing him: by speculating, that is to say, about her 
lost lover. He had been the first man she'd slept with in more than five years: 
no small figure in her life. She had turned away from her sexuality, her 
instincts having warned her that to do otherwise might be to be absorbed by 
it; that it was for her, would always be, a big subject, a whole dark continent 
to map, and she wasn't prepared to go that way, be that explorer, chart 
those shores: not any more, or, maybe, not yet. But she'd never shaken off 
the feeling of being damaged by her ignorance of Love, of what it might be 
like to be wholly possessed by that archetypal, capitalized djinn, the 
yearning towards, the blurring of the boundaries of the self, the unbuttoning, 
until you were open from your adam"s-apple to your crotch: just words, 
because she didn't know the thing. Suppose he had come to me, she 
dreamed. I could have learned him, step by step, climbed him to the very 
summit. Denied mountains by my weak-boned feet, I'd have looked for the 
mountain in him: establishing base camp, sussing out routes, negotiating 
ice--falls, crevasses, overhangs. I'd have assaulted the peak and seen the 
angels dance. O, but he's dead, and at the bottom of the sea. 
Then she found him. -- And maybe he'd invented her, too, a little bit, 
invented someone worth rushing out of one's old life to love. -- Nothing so 
remarkable in that. Happens often enough; and the two inventors go on, 
rubbing the rough edges off one another, adjusting their inventions, 
moulding imagination to actuality, learning how to be together: or not. It 
works out or it doesn't. But to suppose that Gibreel Farishta and Alleluia 
Cone could have gone along so familiar a path is to make the mistake of 
thinking their relationship ordinary. It wasn't; didn't have so much as a shot 
at ordinariness. 

It was a relationship with serious flaws. 

("The modern city," Otto Cone on his hobbyhorse had lectured his bored 
family at table, "is the locus classicus of incompatible realities. Lives that 
have no business mingling with one another sit side by side upon the 
omnibus. One universe, on a zebra crossing, is caught for an instant, 
blinking like a rabbit, in the headlamps of a motor-vehicle in which 
anentirely alien and contradictory continuum is to be found. And as long as 
that's all, they pass in the night, jostling on Tube stations, raising their hats 
in some hotel corridor, it's not so bad. But if they meet! It's uranium and 
plutonium, each makes the other decompose, boom." -- "As a matter of fact, 
dearest," Alicja said dryly, "I often feel a little incompatible myself.") 
The flaws in the grand passion of Alleluia Cone and Gibreel Farishta were as 
follows: her secret fear of her secret desire, that is, love; -- owing to which 
she was wont to retreat from, even hit violently out at, the very person 
whose devotion she sought most; — and the deeper the intimacy, the harder 



she kicked; -- so that the other, having been brought to a place of absolute 
trust, and having lowered all his defences, received the full force of the blow, 
and was devastated; -- which, indeed, is what befell Gibreel Farishta, when 
after three weeks of the most ecstatic lovemaking either of them had ever 
known he was told without ceremony that he had better find himself 
somewhere to live, pretty sharpish, because she, Allie, required more elbow- 
room than was presently available; -- 

— and his overweening possessiveness and jealousy, of which he himself 
had been wholly unaware, owing to his never previously having thought of a 
woman as a treasure that had to be guarded at all costs against the piratical 
hordes who would naturally be trying to purloin her; -- and of which more 
will be said almost instantly; -- 

-- and the fatal flaw, namely, Gibreel Farishta's imminent realization -- or, if 
you will, _insane idea_, -- that he truly was nothing less than an archangel 
in human form, and not just any archangel, but the Angel of the Recitation, 
the most exalted (now that Shaitan had fallen) of them all. 

ooo 

They had spent their days in such isolation, wrapped up in the sheets of 
their desires, that his wild, uncontrollable jealousy, which, as lago warned, 
"doth mock the meat it feeds on", did not instantly come to light. It first 
manifested itself in the absurd matter of the trio of cartoons which Allie had 
hung in a group by her front door, mounted in cream and framed in old gold, 
all bearing the same message, scrawled across the lower right— hand corner 
of the cream mounts: _To A., in hopes, from Brunel_. When Gibreel noticed 
these inscriptions he demanded an explanation, pointing furiously at the 
cartoons with fully extended arm, while with his free hand he clutched a 
bedsheet around him (he was attired in this informal manner because he'd 
decided the time was ripe for him to make a full inspection of the premises, 
_can't spend one's whole Ijfe on one's back, or even yours_, he'd said); Allie, 
forgivably, laughed. "You look like Brutus, all murder and dignity," she 
teased him. "The picture of an honourable man." He shocked her by 
shouting violently: "Tell me at once who the bastard is." 
"You can't be serious," she said. Jack Brunei worked as an animator, was in 
his late fifties and had known her father. She had never had the faintest 
interest in him, but he had taken to courting her by the strangulated, 
wordless method of sending her, from time to time, these graphic gifts. 
"Why you didn't throw them in the wpb?" Gibreel howled. Allie, still not fully 
understanding the size of his rage, continued lightly. She had kept the 
pictures because she liked them. The first was an old Punch cartoon in which 
Leonardo da Vinci stood in his atelier, surrounded by pupils, and hurled the 
Mona Lisa like a frisbee across the room. "_Mark my words_," he said in the 
caption, "_one day men shall fly to Padua in such as these_." In the second 
frame there was a page from _Toff_, a British boys' comic dating from World 
War II. It had been thought necessary in a time when so many children 



became evacuees to create, by way of explanation, a comic—strip version of 
events in the adult world. Here, therefore, was one of the weekly encounters 
between the home team -- the Toff (an appalling monocled child in Etonian 
bum-freezer and pin-striped trousers) and cloth—capped, scuffkneed Bert -- 
and the dastardly foe, Hawful Hadolf and the Nastiparts (a bunch of thuggish 
fiends, each of whom had one extremely nasty part, e.g. a steel hook 
instead of a hand, feet like claws, teeth that could bite through your arm). 
The British team invariably came out on top. Gibreel, glancing at the framed 
comic, was scornful. "You bloody _Angrez_. You really think like this; this is 
what the war was really like for you." Allie decided not to mention her father, 
or to tell Gibreel that one of the _Toff_ artists, a virulently anti— Nazi Berlin 
man named Wolf, had been arrested one day and led away for internment 
along with all the other Germans in Britain, and, according to Brunei, his 
colleagues hadn't lifted a finger to save him. "Heartlessness," Jack had 
reflected. "Only thing a cartoonist really needs. What an artist Disney would 
have been if he hadn't had a heart. It was his fatal flaw." Brunei ran a small 
animation studio named Scarecrow Productions, after the character in _The 
Wizard of Oz_. 

The third frame contained the last drawing from one of the films of the great 
Japanese animator Yoji Kuri, whose uniquely cynical output perfectly 
exemplified Brunei's unsentimental view of the cartoonist's art. In this film, a 
man fell off a skyscraper; a fire engine rushed to the scene and positioned 
itself beneath the falling man. The roof slid back, permitting a huge steel 
spike to emerge, and, in the still on Allie's wall, the man arrived head first 
and the spike rammed into his brain. "Sick," Gibreel Farishta pronounced. 
These lavish gifts having failed to get results, Brunei was obliged to break 
cover and show up in person. He presented himself at Allie's apartment one 
night, unannounced and already considerably the worse for alcohol, and 
produced a bottle of dark rum from his battered briefcase. At three the next 
morning he had drunk the rum but showed no signs of leaving. Allie, going 
ostentatiously off to the bathroom to brush her teeth, returned to find the 
animator standing stark naked in the centre of her living-room rug, revealing 
a surprisingly shapely body covered by an inordinate amount of thick grey 
hair. When he saw her he spread his arms and cried: "Take me! Do what 
you will!" She made him dress, as kindly as she could, and put him and his 
briefcase gently out of the door. He never returned. 

Allie told Gibreel the story, in an open, giggling manner that suggested she 
was entirely unprepared for the storm it would unleash. It is possible, 
however (things had been rather strained between them in recent days) that 
her innocent air was a little disingenuous, that she was almost hoping for 
him to begin the bad behaviour, so that what followed would be his 
responsibility, not hers ... at any rate, Gibreel blew sky— high, accusing 
Allie of having falsified the story's ending, suggesting that poor Brunei was 
still waiting by his telephone and that she intended to ring him the moment 



his, Farishta's, back was turned. Ravings, in short, jealousy of the past, the 
worst kind of all. As this terrible emotion took charge of him, he found 
himself improvising a whole series of lovers for her, imagining them to be 
waiting around every corner. She had used the Brunei story to taunt him, he 
shouted, it was a deliberate and cruel threat. "You want men down on their 
knees," he screamed, every scrap of his selfcontrol long gone. "Me, I do not 
kneel." 

"That's it," she said. "Out." 

His anger redoubled. Clutching his toga around him, he stalked into the 
bedroom to dress, putting on the only clothes he possessed, including the 
scarlet—lined gabardine overcoat and grey felt trilby of Don Enrique Diamond; 
Allie stood in the doorway and watched. "Don't think I'm coming back," he 
yelled, knowing his rage was more than sufficient to get him out of the door, 
waiting for her to begin to calm him down, to speak softly, to give him a way 
of staying. But she shrugged and walked away, and it was then, at that 
precise moment of his greatest wrath, that the boundaries of the earth broke, 
he heard a noise like the bursting of a dam, and as the spirits of the world of 
dreams flooded through the breach into the universe of the quotidian, 
Gibreel Farishta saw God. 

For Blake's Isaiah, God had simply been an immanence, an incorporeal 
indignation; but Gibreel's vision of the Supreme Being was not abstract in 
the least. He saw, sitting on the bed, a man of about the same age as 
himself, of medium height, fairly heavily built, with salt-and-pepper beard 
cropped close to the line of the jaw. What struck him most was that the 
apparition was balding, seemed to suffer from dandruff and wore glasses. 
This was not the Almighty he had expected. "Who are you?" he asked with 
interest. (Of no interest to him now was Alleluia Cone, who had stopped in 
her tracks on hearing him begin to talk to himself, and who was now 
observing him with an expression of genuine panic.) 
"Ooparvala," the apparition answered. "The Fellow Upstairs." 
"How do I know you're not the other One," Gibreel asked craftily, 
"Neechayvala, the Guy from Underneath?" 

A daring question, eliciting a snappish reply. This Deity might look like a 
myopic scrivener, but It could certainly mobilize the traditional apparatus of 
divine rage. Clouds massed outside the window; wind and thunder shook the 
room. Trees fell in the Fields. "We're losing patience with you, Gibreel 
Farishta. You've doubted Us just about long enough." Gibreel hung his head, 
blasted by the wrath of God. "We are not obliged to explain Our nature to 
you," the dressing-down continued. "Whether We be multiform, plural, 
representing the union-by-hybridization of such opposites as _Oopar_ and 
_Neechay_, or whether We be pure, stark, extreme, will not be resolved 
here." The disarranged bed on which his Visitor had rested Its posterior 
(which, Gibreel now observed, was glowing faintly, like the rest of the 
Person) was granted a highly disapproving glance. "The point is, there will 



be no more dilly-dallying. You wanted clear signs of Our existence? We sent 
Revelation to fill your dreams: in which not only Our nature, but yours also, 
was clarified. But you fought against it, struggling against the very sleep in 
which We were awakening you. Your fear of the truth has finally obliged Us 
to expose Ourself, at some personal inconvenience, in this woman's 
residence at an advanced hour of the night. It is time, now, to shape up. Did 
We pluck you from the skies so that you could boff and spat with some (no 
doubt remarkable) flatfoot blonde? There's work to be done." 
"I am ready," Gibreel said humbly. "I was just going, anyway." 
"Look," Allie Cone was saying, "Gibreel, goddamn it, never mind the fight. 
Listen: I love you." 

There were only the two of them in the apartment now. "I have to go," 
Gibreel said, quietly. She hung upon his arm. "Truly, I don't think you're 
really well." He stood upon his dignity. "Having commanded my exit, you no 
longer have jurisdiction re my health." He made his escape. Alleluia, trying 
to follow him, was afflicted by such piercing pains in both feet that, having 
no option, she fell weeping to the floor: like an actress in a masala movie; or 
Rekha Merchant on the day Gibreel walked out on her for the last time. Like, 
anyhow, a character in a story of a kind in which she could never have 
imagined she belonged. 

ooo 

The meteorological turbulence engendered by God's anger with his servant 
had given way to a clear, balmy night presided over by a fat and creamy 
moon. Only the fallen trees remained to bear witness to the might of the 
now—departed Being. Gibreel, trilby jammed down on his head, money-belt 
firmly around his waist, hands deep in gabardine -- the right hand feeling, in 
there, the shape of a paperback book -- was giving silent thanks for his 
escape. Certain now of his archangelic status, he banished from his thoughts 
all remorse for his time of doubting, replacing it with a new resolve: to bring 
this metropolis of the ungodly, this latter-day "Ad orThamoud, back to the 
knowledge of God, to shower upon it the blessings of the Recitation, the 
sacred Word. He felt his old self drop from him, and dismissed it with a 
shrug, but chose to retain, for the time being, his human scale. This was not 
the time to grow until he filled the sky from horizon to horizon -- though that, 
too, would surely come before long. 

The city's streets coiled around him, writhing like serpents. London had 
grown unstable once again, revealing its true, capricious, tormented nature, 
its anguish of a city that had lost its sense of itself and wallowed, accordingly, 
in the impotence of its selfish, angry present of masks and parodies, stifled 
and twisted by the insupportable, unrejected burden of its past, staring into 
the bleakness of its impoverished future. He wandered its streets through 
that night, and the next day, and the next night, and on until the light and 
dark ceased to matter. He no longer seemed to need food or rest, but only 
to move constantly through that tortured metropolis whose fabric was now 



utterly transformed, the houses in the rich quarters being built of solidified 
fear, the government buildings partly of vainglory and partly of scorn, and 
the residences of the poor of confusion and material dreams. When you 
looked through an angel's eyes you saw essences instead of surfaces, you 
saw the decay of the soul blistering and bubbling on the skins of people in 
the street, you saw the generosity of certain spirits resting on their 
shoulders in the form of birds. As he roamed the metamorphosed city he 
saw bat-winged imps sitting on the corners of buildings made of deceits and 
glimpsed goblins oozing wormily through the broken tilework of public 
urinals for men. As once the thirteenth-century German monk Richalmus 
would shut his eyes and instantly see clouds of minuscule demons 
surrounding every man and woman on earth, dancing like dust-specks in the 
sunlight, so now Gibreel with open eyes and by the light of the moon as well 
as the sun detected everywhere the presence of his adversary, his — to give 
the old word back its original meaning -- _shaitan_. 
Long before the Flood, he remembered -- now that he had reassumed the 
role of archangel, the full range of archangelic memory and wisdom was 
apparently being restored to him, little by little -- a number of angels (the 
names Semjaza and Azazel came first to mind) had been flung out of 
Heaven because they had been Justing after the daughters of men_, who in 
due course gave birth to an evil race of giants. He began to understand the 
degree of the danger from which he had been saved when he departed from 
the vicinity of Alleluia Cone. O most false of creatures! O princess of the 
powers of the air! -- When the Prophet, on whose name be peace, had first 
received the wahi, the Revelation, had he not feared for his sanity? -- And 
who had offered him the reassuring certainty he needed? -- Why, Khadija, 
his wife. She it was who convinced him that he was not some raving crazy 
but the Messenger of God. -- Whereas what had Alleluia done for him? 
_You're not yourself. I don't think you're really well_. -- O bringer of 
tribulation, creatrix of strife, of soreness of the heart! Siren, temptress, fiend 
in human form! That snowlike body with its pale, pale hair: how she had 
used it to fog his soul, and how hard he had found it, in the weakness of his 
flesh, to resist . . . enmeshed by her in the web of a love so complex as to 
be beyond comprehension, he had come to the very edge of the ultimate Fall. 
How beneficent, then, the OverEntity had been to him! -- He saw now that 
the choice was simple: the infernal love of the daughters of men, or the 
celestial adoration of God. He had found it possible to choose the latter; in 
the nick of time. 

He drew out of the right-hand pocket of his overcoat the book that had been 
there ever since his departure from Rosa's house a millennium ago: the book 
of the city he had come to save, Proper London, capital of Vilayet, laid out 
for his benefit in exhaustive detail, the whole bang shoot. He would redeem 
this city: Geographers' London, all the way from A to Z. 

ooo 



On a street corner in a part of town once known for its population of artists, 
radicals and men in search of prostitutes, and now given over to advertising 
personnel and minor film producers, the Archangel Gibreel chanced to see a 
lost soul. It was young, male, tall, and of extreme beauty, with a strikingly 
aquiline nose and longish black hair oiled down and parted in the centre; its 
teeth were made of gold. The lost soul stood at the very edge of the 
pavement, its back to the road, leaning forwards at a slight angle and 
clutching, in its right hand, something it evidently held very dear. Its 
behaviour was striking: first it would stare fiercely at the thing it held in its 
hand, and then look around, whipping its head from right to left, scrutinizing 
with blazing concentration the faces of the passers-by. Reluctant to 
approach too quickly, Gibreel on a first pass saw that the object the lost soul 
was clutching was a small passport-sized photograph. On his second pass he 
went right up to the stranger and offered his help. The other eyed him 
suspiciously, then thrust the photograph under his nose. "This man," he said, 
jabbing at the picture with a long index finger. "Do you know this man?" 
When Gibreel saw, staring out of the photograph, a young man of extreme 
beauty, with a strikingly aquiline nose and longish black hair, oiled, with a 
central parting, he knew that his instincts had been correct, that here, 
standing on a busy street corner watching the crowd in case he saw himself 
going by, was a Soul in search of its mislaid body, a spectre in desperate 
need of its lost physical casing -- for it is known to archangels that the soul 
or ka cannot exist (once the golden cord of light linking it to the body is 
severed) for more than a night and a day. "I can help you," he promised, 
and the young soul looked at him in wild disbelief. Gibreel leaned forward, 
grasped the ka's face between his hands, and kissed it firmly upon the 
mouth, for the spirit that is kissed by an archangel regains, at once, its lost 
sense of direction, and is set upon the true and righteous path. -- The lost 
soul, however, had a most surprising reaction to being favoured by an 
archangelic kiss. "Sod you," it shouted, "I may be desperate, mate, but I'm 
not that desperate," -- after which, manifesting a solidity most unusual in a 
disembodied spirit, it struck the Archangel of the Lord a resounding blow 
upon the nose with the very fist in which its image was clasped; -- with 
disorienting, and bloody, results. 

When his vision cleared, the lost soul had gone but there, floating on her 
carpet a couple of feet off the ground, was Rekha Merchant, mocking his 
discomfiture. "Not such a great start," she snorted. "Archangel my foot. 
Gibreel janab, you're off your head, take it from me. You played too many 
winged types for your own good. I wouldn't trust that Deity of yours either, 
if I were you," she added in a more conspiratorial tone, though Gibreel 
suspected that her intentions remained satirical. "He hinted as much himself, 
fudging the answer to your Oopar--Neechay question like he did. This notion 
of separation of functions, light versus dark, evil versus good, may be 
straightforward enough in Islam -- _0, children of Adam, let not the Devil 



seduce you, as he expelled your parents from the garden, pulling off from 
them their clothing that he might show them their shame_ -- but go back a 
bit and you see that it's a pretty recent fabrication. Amos, eighth century BC, 
asks: 'Shall there be evil in a city and the Lord hath not done it?' Also 
Jahweh, quoted by Deutero-Isaiah two hundred years later, remarks: 'I form 
the light, and create darkness; I make peace and create evil; I the Lord do 
all these things.' It isn't until the Book of Chronicles, merely fourth century 
BC, that the word shaitan is used to mean a being, and not only an attribute 
of God." This speech was one of which the "real" Rekha would plainly have 
been incapable, coming as she did from a polytheistic tradition and never 
having evinced the faintest interest in comparative religion or, of all things, 
the Apocrypha. But the Rekha who had been pursuing him ever since he fell 
from _Bostan_ was, Gibreel knew, not real in any objective, psychologically 
or corporeally consistent manner. -- What, then, was she? It would be easy 
to imagine her as a thing of his own making -- his own accomplice-adversary, 
his inner demon. That would account for her case with the arcana. -- But 
how had he himself come by such knowledge? Had he truly, in days gone by, 
possessed it and then lost it, as his memory now informed him? (He had a 
nagging notion of inaccuracy here, but when he tried to fix his thoughts 
upon his "dark age", that is to say the period during which he had 
unaccountably come to disbelieve in his angelhood, he was faced with a 
thick bank of clouds, through which, peer and blink as he might, he could 
make out little more than shadows.) — Or could it be that the material now 
filling his thoughts, the echo, to give but a single example, of how his 
lieutenant-angels Ithuriel and Zephon had found the adversary _squat like a 
toad_ by Eve's ear in Eden, using his wiles "to reach/The organs of her fancy, 
and with them forge/Illusions as he list, phantasms and dreams", had in fact 
been planted in his head by that same ambiguous Creature, that Upstairs- 
Downstairs Thing, who had confronted him in Alleluia's boudoir, and awoken 
him from his long waking sleep? -- Then Rekha, too, was perhaps an 
emissary of this God, an external, divine antagonist and not an inner, guilt- 
produced shade; one sent to wrestle with him and make him whole again. 
His nose, leaking blood, began to throb painfully. He had never been able to 
tolerate pain. "Always a cry-baby," Rekha laughed in his face. Shaitan had 
understood more: 
_Lives there who loves his pain?_ 
_Who would not,finding way, break loose from hell_, 
_Though thither doomed? Thou wouldst thyself, no doubt_, 
_And boldly venture to whatever place_ 



_Farthest from pain, where thou mightst hope to change_ 
_Torment with ease_ . . . 

He couldn't have put it better. A person who found himself in an inferno 
would do anything, rape, extortion, murder, felo de se, whatever it took to 
get out ... he dabbed a handkerchief at his nose as Rekha, still present on 
her flying rug, and intuiting his ascent (descent?) into the realm of 
metaphysical speculation, attempted to get things back on to more familiar 
ground. "You should have stuck with me," she opined. "You could have loved 
me, good and proper. I knew how to love. Not everybody has the capacity 
for it; I do, I mean did. Not like that self— centred blonde bombshell thinking 
secretly about having a child and not even mentioning same to you. Not like 
your God, either; it's not like the old days, when such Persons took proper 
interest." 

This needed contesting on several grounds. "You were married, start to 
finish," he replied. "Ball—bearings. I was your side dish. Nor will I, who 
waited so long for Him to manifest Himself, now speak poorly of Him post 
facto, after the personal appearance. Finally, what's all this baby-talk? You'll 
go to any extreme, seems like." 

"You don't know what hell is," she snapped back, dropping the mask of her 
imperturbability. "But, buster, you sure will. If you'd ever said, I'd have 
thrown over that ball-bearings bore in two sees, but you kept mum. Now I'll 
see you down there: Neechayvala's Hotel." 

"You'd never have left your children," he insisted. "Poor fellows, you even 
threw them down first when you jumped." That set her off. "Don't you talk! 
To dare to talk! Mister, I'll cook your goose! I'll fry your heart and eat it up 
on toast! -- And as to your Snow White princess, she is of the opinion that a 
child is a mother's property only, because men may come and men may go 
but she goes on forever, isn't it? You're only the seed, excuse me, she is the 
garden. Who asks a seed permission to plant? What do you know, damn fool 
Bombay boy messing with the modern ideas of mames." 
"And you," he came back strongly. "Did you, for example, ask their Daddyji's 
permission before you threw his kiddies off the roof?" She vanished in fury 
and yellow smoke, with an explosion that made him stagger and knocked 
the hat off his head (it lay upturned on the pavement at his feet). She 
unleashed, too, an olfactory effect of such nauseous potency as to make 
thim gag and retch. Emptily: for he was perfectly void of all fcocdstuffs and 
liquids, having partaken of no nourishment for many days. Ah, immortality, 
he thought: ah, noble release from the tyranny of the body. He noticed that 
there were two individuals watching him curiously, one a violent-looking 
youth in studs and - leather, with a rainbow Mohican haircut and a streak of 
face-paint lightning zig-zagging down his nose, the other a kindly middle- 
aged woman in a headscarf. Very well then: seize the day. "Repent," he 
cried passionately. "For I am the Archangel of the Lord." 



"Poor bastard," said the Mohican and threw a coin into Farishta's fallen hat. 
He walked on; the kindly, twinkling lady, however, leaned confidentially 
towards Gibreel and passed him a leaflet. "You'll be interested in this." He 
quickly identified it as a racist text demanding the "repatriation" of the 
country's black citizenry. She took him, he deduced, for a white angel. So 
angels were not exempt from such categories, he wonderingly learned. 
"Look at it this way," the woman was saying, taking his silence for 
uncertainty -- and revealing, by slipping into an overarticulated, over-loud 
mode of delivery, that she thought him not quite pukka, a Levantine angel, 
maybe, Cypriot or Greek, in need of her best talking— to— the--afflicted voice. 
"If they came over and filled up wherever you come from, well! You wouldn't 
like_that_." 

0 0 0 

Punched in the nose, taunted by phantoms, given alms instead of reverence, 
and in divers ways shewn the depths to wihich the denizens of the city had 
sunk, the intransigence of "the evil manifest there, Gibreel became more 
determined than ever to commence the doing of good, to initiate the great 
work of rolling back the frontiers of the adversary's dominion. The atlas in 
his pocket was his master-plan. He would redeem the city square by square, 
from Hockley Farm in the north-west cornerr of the charted area to Chance 
Wood in the south-east; after which, perhaps, he would celebrate the 
conclusion of his labours by playing a round of golf at the aptly named 
course situated at the very edge of the map: Wildernesse. And somewhere 
along the way the adversary himself would be waiting. Shaitan, Iblis, or 
whatever name he had adopted -- and in point of fact that name was on the 
tip of Gibreel's tongue -- just as the face of the adversary, horned and 
malevolent, was still somewhat out of focus . . . well, it would take shape 
soon enough, and the name would come back, Gibreel was sure of it, for 
were not his powers growing every day, was he not the one who, restored to 
his glory, would hurl the adversary down, once more, into the Darkest Deeps? 
-- That name: what was it? Tchsomething? Tchu Tche Tchin Tchow. No 
matter. All in good time. 

ooo 

But the city in its corruption refused to submit to the dominion of the 
cartographers, changing shape at will and without warning, making it 
impossible for Gibreel to approach his quest in the systematic manner he 
would have preferred. Some days he would turn a corner at the end of a 
grand colonnade built of human flesh and covered in skin that bled when 
scratched, and find himself in an uncharted wasteland, at whose distant rim 
he could see tall familiar buildings, Wren's dome, the high metallic spark- 
plug of the Telecom Tower, crumbling in the wind like sandcastles. He would 
stumble across bewildering and anonymous parks and emerge into the 
crowded streets of the West End, upon which, to the consternation of the 
motorists, acid had begun to drip from the sky, burning great holes in the 



surfaces of the roads. In this pandemonium of mirages he often heard 
laughter: the city was mocking his impotence, awaiting his surrender, his 
recognition that what existed here was beyond his powers to comprehend, 
let alone to change. He shouted curses at his still—faceless adversary, 
pleaded with the Deity for a further sign, feared that his energies might, in 
truth, never be equal to the task. In brief, he was becoming the most 
wretched and bedraggled of archangels, his garments filthy, his hair lank 
and greasy, his chin sprouting hair in uncontrollable tufts. It was in this 
sorry condition that he arrived at the Angel Underground. 
It must have been early in the morning, because the station staff drifted up 
as he watched, to unlock and then roll back the metal grille of night. He 
followed them in, shuffling along, head low, hands deep in pockets (the 
Street atlas had been discarded long ago); and raising his eyes at last, found 
himself looking into a face on the verge of dissolving into tears. 
"Good morning," he ventured, and the young woman in the ticket office 
responded bitterly, "What's good about it, that's what I want to know," and 
now her tears did come, plump, globular and plenteous. "There, there, 
child," he said, and she gave him a disbelieving look. "You're no priest," she 
opined. He answered, a little tentatively: "I am the Angel, Gibreel." She 
began to laugh, as abruptly as she had wept. "Only angels roun here hang 
from the lamp-posts at Christmas. Illuminations. Only the Council swing 
them by their necks." He was not to be put off. "I am Gibreel," he repeated, 
fixing her with his eye. "Recite." And, to her own emphatically expressed 
astonishment, _I cyaan believe I doin this, empt yin my heart to some 
tramp, I not like this, you know_, the ticket clerk began to speak. 
Her name was Orphia Phillips, twenty years old, both parents alive and 
dependent on her, especially now that her fool sister Hyacinth had lost her 
job as a physiotherapist by "gettin up to she nonsense". The young man's 
name, for of course there was a young man, was Uriah Moseley. The station 
had recently installed two gleaming new elevators and Orphia and Uriah 
were their operators. During rush-hours, when both lifts were working, they 
had little time for conversation; but for the rest of the day, only one lift was 
used. Orphia took up her position at the ticket—collection point just along 
from the elevator-shaft, and Uri managed to spend a good deal of time down 
there with her, leaning against the door-jamb of his gleaming lift and picking 
his teeth with the silver toothpick his great— grandfather had liberated from 
some old-time plantation boss. It was true love. "But I jus get carry away," 
Orphia wailed at Gibreel. "I always too hasty for sense." One afternoon, 
during a lull, she had deserted her post and stepped up right in front of him 
as he leaned and picked teeth, and seeing the look in her eye he put away 
the pick. After that he came to work with a spring in his step; she, too, was 
in heaven as she descended each day into the bowels of the earth. Their 
kisses grew longer and more passionate. Sometimes she would not detach 
himself when the buzzer rang for the lift; Uriah would have to push her back, 



with a cry of, "Cool off, girl, the public." Uriah had a vocational attitude to 
his work. He spoke to her of his pride in his uniform, of his satisfaction at 
being in the public service, giving his life to society. She thought he sounded 
a shade pompous, and wanted to say, "Uri, man, you jus a elevator boy 
here," but intuiting that such realism would not be well received, she held 
her troublesome tongue, or, rather, pushed it into his mouth. Their 
embraces in the tunnel became wars. Now he was trying to get away, 
straightening his tunic, while she bit his ear and pushed her hand down 
inside his trousers. "You crazy," he said, but she, continuing, inquired: "So? 
You vex?" 

They were, inevitably, caught: a complaint was lodged by a kindly lady in 
headscarf and tweeds. They had been lucky to keep their jobs. Orphia had 
been "grounded", deprived of elevator-shafts and boxed into the ticket booth. 
Worse still, her place had been taken by the station beauty, Rochelle 
Watkins. "I know what goin on," she cried angrily. "I see Rochelle expression 
when she come up, fixin up her hair an all o" dat." Uriah, nowadays, avoided 
Orphia's eyes. 

"Can't figure out how you get me to tell you me business," she concluded, 
uncertainly. "You not no angel. That is for sure." But she was unable, try as 
she might, to break away from his transfixing gaze. "I know," he told her, 
"what is in your heart." 

He reached in through the booth's window and took her unresisting hand. -- 
Yes, this was it, the force of her desires filling him up, enabling him to 
translate them back to her, making action possible, allowing her to say and 
do what she most profoundly required; this was what he remembered, this 
quality of being joined to the one to whom he appeared, so that what 
followed was the product of their joining. At last, he thought, the archangelic 
functions return. -- Inside the ticket booth, the clerk Orphia Phillips had her 
eyes closed, her body had slumped down in her chair, looking slow and 
heavy, and her lips were moving. -- And his own, in unison with hers. -- 
There. It was done. 

At this moment the station manager, a little angry man with nine long hairs, 
fetched from ear—level, plastered across his baldness, burst like a cuckoo 
from his little door. "What's your game?" he shouted at Gibreel. "Get out of 
it before I call the police." Gibreel stayed where he was. The station 
manager saw Orphia emerging from her trance and began to shriek. "You, 
Phillips. Never saw the like. Anything in trousers, but this is ridiculous. All 
my born days. And nodding off on the job, the idea." Orphia stood up, put 
on her raincoat, picked up her folding umbrella, emerged from ticket booth. 
"Leaving public property unattended. You get back in there this minute, or 
it's your job, sure as eggsis." Orphia headed for the spiral stairs and moved 
towards the lower depths. Deprived of his employee, the manager swung 
round to face Gibreel. "Go on," he said. "Eff off. Go crawl back under your 
stone." 



"I am waiting," replied Gibreel with dignity, "for the lift." 
When she reached the bottom of the stairs, Orphia Phillips turning a corner 
saw Uriah Moseley leaning against the ticketcollection booth in that way he 
had, and Rochelle Watkins simpering with delight. But Orphia knew what to 
do. "You let "Chelle feel you toothpick yet, Uri?" she sang out. "She'd surely 
love to hold it." 

They both straightened up, stung. Uriah began blustering: "Don't be so 
common now, Orphia," but her eyes stopped him in his tracks. Then he 
began to walk towards her, dreamily, leaving Rochelle flat. "Thas right, Uri," 
she said softly, never looking away from him for an instant. "Come along 
now. Come to momma." _Now walk backwards to the lift and just suck him 
right in there, and after that it's up and away we go_. -- But something was 
wrong here. He wasn't walking any more. Rochelle Watkins was standing 
beside him, too damn close, and he'd come to a halt. "You tell her, Uriah," 
Rochelle said. "Her stupid obeah don't signify down here." Uriah was putting 
an arm around Rochelle Watkins. This wasn't the way she'd dreamed it, the 
way she'd suddenly been certain-sure it would be, after that Gibreel took her 
hand, just like that, as if they were _intended_; wee-yurd, she thought; 
what was happening to her? She advanced. -- "Get her offa me, Uriah," 
Rochelle shouted. "She mashin up me uniform and all." -- Now Uriah, 
holding the struggling ticket clerk by both wrists, gave out the news: "I aks 
her to get marry!" -- Whereupon the fight went out of Orphia. Beaded plaits 
no longer whirled and clicked. "So you out of order, Orphia Phillips," Uriah 
continued, puffing somewhat. "And like the lady say, no obeah na change 
nutten." Orphia, also breathing heavily, her clothes disarranged, flopped 
down on the floor with her back to the curved tunnel wall. The noise of a 
train pulling in came up towards them; the affianced couple hurried to their 
posts, tidying themselves up, leaving Orphia where she sat. "Girl," Uriah 
Moseley offered by way of farewell, "you too damn outrageous for me." 
Rochelle Watkins blew Uriah a kiss from her ticket-collection booth; he, 
lounging against his lift, picked his teeth. "Home cooking," Rochelle 
promised him. "And no surprises." "You filthy bum," Orphia Phillips screamed 
at Gibreel after walking up the two hundred and forty-seven steps of the 
spiral staircase of defeat. "You no good devil bum. Who ask you to mash up 
me life so?" 

ooo 

_Even the halo has gone out, like a broken bulb, and I don't know where's 
the store_. Gibreel on a bench in the small park near the station meditated 
over the futility of his efforts to date. And found blasphemies surfacing once 
again: if the dabba had the wrong markings and so went to incorrect 
recipient, was the dabbawalla to blame? If special effect — travelling mat, or 
such -- didn't work, and you saw the blue outline shimmering at the edge of 
the flying fellow, how to blame the actor? Bythesametoken, if his angeling 
was proving insufficient, whose fault, please, was this? His, personally, or 



some other Personage? -- Children were playing in the garden of his 
doubting, among the midge-clouds and rosebushes and despair. 
Grandmother's footsteps, ghostbusters, tag. Ellowen deeowen, London. The 
fall of angels, Gibreel reflected, was not the same kettle as the Tumble of 
Woman and Man. In the case of human persons, the issue had been morality. 
Of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil they shouldst not 
eat, and ate. Woman first, and at her suggestion man, acquired the 
verboten ethical standards, tastily apple-flavoured: the serpent brought 
them a value system. Enabling them, among other things, to judge the Deity 
Itself, making possible in good time all the awkward inquiries: why evil? Why 
suffering? Why death? -- So, out they went. It didn't want Its pretty 
creatures getting above their station. -- Children giggled in his face: 
_something straaange in the neighbourhoods Armed with zapguns, they 
made as if to bust him like some common, lowdown spook. _Come away 
from there_, a woman commanded, a tightly groomed woman, white, a 
redhead, with a broad stripe of freckles across the middle of her face; her 
voice was full of distaste. _Did you hear me? Now!_ -- Whereas the angels' 
crash was a simple matter of power: a straightforward piece of celestial 
police work, punishment for rebellion, good and tough "pour encourager les 
autres". -- Then how unconfident of Itself this Deity was, Who didn't want 
Its finest creations to know right from wrong; and Who reigned by terror, 
insisting upon the unqualified submission of even Its closest associates, 
packing off all dissidents to Its blazing Siberias, the gulag-infernos of Hell. . . 
he checked himself. These were satanic thoughts, put into his head by Iblis— 
Beelzebub-Shaitan. If the Entity were still punishing him for his earlier lapse 
of faith, this was no way to earn remission. He must simply continue until, 
purified, he felt his full potency restored. Emptying his mind, he sat in the 
gathering darkness and watched the children (now at some distance) play. 
_Ip-dipsky-blue who"s-there-not-you not-because-you"re-dirty not- 
becauseyou"re-clean_, and here, he was sure, one of the boys, a grave 
eleven--year--old with outsize eyes, stared straight at him: _mymother-says 
you"re-the-fairy-queen_. 

Rekha Merchant materialized, all jewels and finery. "Bachchas are making 
rude rhymes about you now, Angel of the Lord," she gibed. "Even that little 
ticket— girl back there, she isn't so impressed. Still doing badly, baba, looks 
like to me." 

ooo 

On this occasion, however, the spirit of the suicide Rekha Merchant had not 
come merely to mock. To his astonishment she claimed that his many 
tribulations had been of her making: "You imagine there is only your One 
Thing in charge?" she cried. "Well, lover--boy, let me put you wise." Her 
smart—alec Bombay English speared him with a sudden nostalgia for his lost 
city, but she wasn't waiting for him to regain his composure. "Remember 
that I died for love of you, you creepo; this gives me rights. In particular, to 



be revenged upon you, by totally bungling up your life. A man must suffer 
for causing a lover's leap; don't you think so? That's the rule, anyway. For so 
long now I've turned you inside out; now I'm just fed up. Don't forget how I 
was so good at forgiving! You liked it also, na? Therefore I have come to say 
that compromise solution is always possible. You want to discuss it, or you 
prefer to go on being lost in this craziness, becoming not an angel but a 
down-and-out hobo, a stupid joke?" 
Gibreel asked: "What compromise?" 

"What else?" she replied, her manner transformed, all gentleness, with a 
shine in her eyes. "My farishta, a so small thing." 
If he would only say he loved her: 

If he would only say it, and, once a week, when she came to lie with him, 
show his love: 

If on a night of his choice it could be as it was during the ball— bearings- 
man's absences on business: 

"Then I will terminate the insanities of the city, with which I am persecuting 
you; nor will you be possessed, any longer, by this crazy notion of changing, 
_redeeming_ the city like something left in a pawnshop; it'll all be calm- 
calm; you can even live with your paleface mame and be the greatest film 
star in the world; how could I be jealous, Gibreel, when I'm already dead, I 
don't want you to say I'm as important as her, no, just a second— rank love 
will do for me, a side-dish amour; the foot in the other boot. How about it, 
Gibreel, just three— little-words, what do you say?" 
_Give me time_. 

"It isn't even as if I'm asking for something new, something you haven't 
already agreed to, done, indulged in. Lying with a phantom is not such a 
bad-bad thing. What about down at that old Mrs. Diamond's -- in the 
boathouse, that night? Quite a tamasha, you don't think so? So: who do you 
think put it on? Listen: I can take for you any form you prefer; one of the 
advantages of my condition. You wish her again, that boathouse mame from 
the stone age? Hey presto. You want the mirror image of your own 
mountain-climber sweaty tomboy iceberg? Also, allakazoo, allakazam. Who 
do you think it was, waiting for you after the old lady died?" 
All that night he walked the city streets, which remained stable, banal, as if 
restored to the hegemony of natural laws; while Rekha -- floating before him 
on her carpet like an artiste on a stage, just above head-height -- serenaded 
him with the sweetest of love songs, accompanying herself on an old 
ivorysided harmonium, singing everything from the gazals of Faiz Ahmed 
Faiz to the best old film music, such as the defiant air sung by the dancer 
Anarkali in the presence of the Grand Mughal Akbar in the fifties classic 
_Mughal-e-Azam_, -- in which she declares and exults in her impossible, 
forbidden love for the Prince, Salim, — "Pyaar kiya to darna kya?" -- That is 
to say, more or less, _why be afraid of love?_ and Gibreel, whom she had 
accosted in the garden of his doubt, felt the music attaching strings to his 



heart and leading him towards her, because what she asked was, just as she 
said, such a little thing, after all. 

He reached the river; and another bench, cast—iron camels supporting the 
wooden slats, beneath Cleopatra's Needle. Sitting, he closed his eyes. Rekha 
sang Faiz: 

_Do not ask of me, my love_, 

_that love I once had for you_ . . . 

_How lovely you are still, my love_, 

_but I am helpless too_; 

_for the world has other sorrows than love_, 

_and other pleasures too_. 

_Do not ask of me, my love_, 

_that love I once had for you_. 

Gibreel saw a man behind his closed eyes: not Faiz, but another poet, well 
past his heyday, a decrepit sort of fellow. -- Yes, that was his name: Baal. 
What was he doing here? What did he have to say for himself? -- Because he 
was certainly trying to say something; his speech, thick and slurry, made 
understanding difficult . . . _Any new idea, Mahound, is asked two questions. 
The first is asked when it's weak: WHA T KIND OF AN IDEA ARE YOU? Are 
you the kind that compromises, does deals, accommodates itself to society, 
aims to find a niche, to survive; or are you the cussed, bloody-minded, 
ramrod-backed type of damnfool notion that would rather break than sway 
with the breeze? -- The kind that will almost certainly, ninety-nine times out 
of a hundred, be smashed to bits; but, the hundredth time, will change the 
world_. 

"What's the second question?" Gibreel asked aloud. 
_Answer the first one first_. 

ooo 

Gibreel, opening his eyes at dawn, found Rekha unable to sing, silenced by 
expectations and uncertainties. He let her have it straight off. "It's a trick. 
There is no God but God. You are neither the Entity nor Its adversary, but 
only some caterwauling mist. No compromises; I won't do deals with fogs." 
He saw, then, the emeralds and brocades fall from her body, followed by the 
flesh, until only the skeleton remained, after which that, too, crumbled away; 
finally, there was a piteous, piercing shriek, as whatever was left of Rekha 
flew with vanquished fury into the sun. 
And did not return: except at -- or near -- the end. 
Convinced that he had passed a test, Gibreel realized that a great weight 
had lifted from him; his spirits grew lighter by the second, until by the time 
the sun was in the sky he was literally delirious with joy. Now it could really 
begin: the tyranny of his enemies, of Rekha and Alleluia Cone and all the 
women who wished to bind him in the chains of desires and songs, was 
broken for good; now he could feel light streaming out, once more, from the 
unseen point just behind his head; and his weight, too, began to diminish. — 



Yes, he was losing the last traces of his humanity, the gift of flight was being 
restored to him, as he became ethereal, woven of illumined air. -- He could 
simply step, this minute, off this blackened parapet and soar away above the 
old grey river; -- or leap from any of its bridges and never touch land again. 
So: it was time to show the city a great sight, for when it perceived the 
Archangel Gibreel standing in all his majesty upon the western horizon, 
bathed in the rays of the rising sun, then surely its people would be sore 
afraid and repent them of their sins. 
He began to enlarge his person. 

How astonishing, then, that of all the drivers streaming along the 
Embankment -- it was, after all, rush-hour -- not one should so much as 
look in his direction, or acknowledge him! This was in truth a people who 
had forgotten how to see. And because the relationship between men and 
angels is an ambiguous one -- in which the angels, or mala"ikah, are both 
the controllers of nature and the intermediaries between the Deity and the 
human race; but at the same time, as the Quran clearly states, _we said 
unto the angels, be submissive unto Adam_, the point being to symbolize 
man's ability to master, through knowledge, the forces of nature which the 
angels represented -- there really wasn't much that the ignored and 
infuriated malak Gibreel could do about it. Archangels could only speak when 
men chose to listen. What a bunch! Hadn't he warned the Over-Entity at the 
very beginning about this crew of criminals and evildoers? "Wilt thou place in 
the earth such as make mischief in it and shed blood?" he had asked, and 
the Being, as usual, replied only that he knew better. Well, there they were, 
the masters of the earth, canned like tuna on wheels and blind as bats, their 
heads full of mischief and their newspapers of blood. 
It really was incredible. Here appeared a celestial being, all radiance, 
effulgence and goodness, larger than Big Ben, capable of straddling the 
Thames colossus—style, and these little ants remained immersed in drive- 
time radio and quarrels with fellowmotorists. "I am Gibreel," he shouted in a 
voice that shook every building on the riverbank: nobody noticed. Not one 
person came running out of those quaking edifices to escape the earthquake. 
Blind, deaf and asleep. 
He decided to force the issue. 

The stream of traffic flowed past him. He took a mighty breath, lifted one 
gigantic foot, and stepped out to face the cars. 

ooo 

Gibreel Farishta was returned to Allie's doorstep, badly bruised, with many 
grazes on his arms and face, and jolted into sanity, by a tiny shining 
gentleman with an advanced stammer who introduced himself with some 
difficulty as the film producer S.S. Sisodia, "known as Whiwhisky because 
I'm papa partial to a titi tipple; mamadam, my caca card." (When they knew 
each other better, Sisodia would send Allie into convulsions of laughter by 
rolling up his right trouser-leg, exposing the knee, and pronouncing, while 



he held his enormous wraparound movie-man glasses to his shin: "Self 
pawpaw portrait." He was longsighted to a degree: "Don't need help to see 
moomovies but real life gets too damn cloclose up.") It was Sisodia's rented 
limo that hit Gibreel, a slow-motion accident luckily, owing to traffic 
congestion; the actor ended up on the bonnet, mouthing the oldest line in 
the movies: _Where am I_, and Sisodia, seeing the legendary features of 
the vanished demigod squashed up against the limousine's windshield, was 
tempted to answer: _Baback where you bibi belong: on the iska iska 
iscreen_. -- "No bobobones broken," Sisodia told Allie. "A mimi miracle. He 
ista ista istepped right in fafa front of the weewee wehicle." 
_So you're back_, Allie greeted Gibreel silently. _Seems this is where you 
always land up after you fall_. 

"Also Scotch-and-Sisodia," the film producer reverted to the question of his 
sobriquets. "For hoohoo humorous reasons. My fafavourite pup pup poison." 
"It is very kind of you to bring Gibreel home," Allie belatedly got the point. 
"You must allow us to offer you a drink." 

"Sure! Sure!" Sisodia actually clapped his hands. "For me, for whowhole of 
heehee Hindi cinema, today is a baba banner day." 

ooo 

"You have not heard perhaps the story of the paranoid schizophrenic who, 
believing himself to be the Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte, agreed to undergo 
a lie—detector test?" Alicja Cohen, eating gefilte fish hungrily, waved one of 
Bloom's forks under her daughter's nose. "The question they asked him: are 
you Napoleon? And the answer he gave, smiling wickedly, no doubt: No. So 
they watch the machine, which indicates with all the insight of modern 
science that the lunatic is lying." Blake again, Allie thought. _Then I asked: 
does afirm perswasion that a thing is so, make it so? He_ -- i.e. Isaiah -- 
_replied. All poets believe that it does. & in ages of imagination this firm 
perswasion removed mountains; but many are not capable of a firm 
perswasion of any thing_. "Are you listening to me, young woman? I'm 
serious here. That gentleman you have in your bed: he requires not your 
nightly attentions -- excuse me but I'll speak plainly; seeing I must -- but, to 
be frank, a padded cell." 

"You'd do that, wouldn't you," Allie hit back. "You'd throw away the key. 
Maybe you'd even plug him in. Burn the devils out of his brain: strange how 
our prejudices never change." 

"Hmm," Alicja ruminated, adopting her vaguest and most innocent 
expression in order to infuriate her daughter. "What can it harm? Yes, 



maybe a little voltage, a little dose of the juice. . 

"What he needs is what he's getting, mother. Proper medical supervision, 
plenty of rest, and something you maybe forgot about." She dried suddenly, 
her tongue knotted, and it was in quite a different, low voice, staring at her 
untouched salad, that she got out the last word. "Love." 
"Ah, the power of love," Alicja patted her daughter's (at once withdrawn) 
hand. "No, it's not what I forgot, Alleluia. It's what you just begun for the 
first time in your beautiful life to learn. And who do you pick?" She returned 
to the attack. "An out-tolunch! A ninety-pennies-in-the-pound! A butterflies- 
in-thebrainbox! I mean, _angels_, darling, I never heard the like. Men are 
always claiming special privileges, but this one is a first." 
"Mother . . ." Allie began, but Alicja's mood had changed again, and this 
time, when she spoke, Allie was not listening to the words, but hearing the 
pain they both revealed and concealed, the pain of a woman to whom 
history had most brutally happened, who had already lost a husband and 
seen one daughter precede her to what she once, with unforgettable black 
humour, referred to (she must have read the sports pages, by some chance, 
to come across the phrase) as an _early bath_. "Allie, my baby," Alicja 
Cohen said, "we're going to have to take good care of you." 
One reason why Allie was able to spot that panic-anguish in her mother's 
face was her recent sighting of the same combination on the features of 
Gibreel Farishta. After Sisodia returned him to her care, it became plain that 
Gibreel had been shaken to the very marrow, and there was a haunted look 
to him, a scarified popeyed quality, that quite pierced her heart. He faced 
the fact of his mental illness with courage, refusing to play it down or call it 
by a false name, but his recognition of it had, understandably, cowed him. 
No longer (for the present, anyway) the ebullient vulgarian for whom she 
had conceived her "grand passion", he became for her, in this newly 
vulnerable incarnation, more lovable than ever. She grew determined to lead 
him back to sanity, to stick it out; to wait out the storm, and conquer the 
peak. And he was, for the moment, the easiest and most malleable of 
patients, somewhat dopey as a result of the heavy-duty medication he was 
being given by the specialists at the Maudsley Hospital, sleeping long hours, 
and acquiescing, when awake, in all her requests, without a murmur of 
protest. In alert moments he filled in for her the full background to his 
illness: the strange serial dreams, and before that the near-fatal breakdown 
in India. "I am no longer afraid of sleep," he told her. "Because what's 
happened in my waking time is now so much worse." His greatest fear 
reminded her of Charles II's terror, after his Restoration, of being sent "on 
his travels" again: "I'd give anything only to know it won't happen any 
more," he told her, meek as a lamb. 

_Lives there who loves his pain?_ "It won't happen," she reassured him. 
"You've got the best help there is." He quizzed her about money, and, when 
she tried to deflect the questions, insisted that she withdraw the psychiatric 



fees from the small fortune stashed in his money—belt. His spirits remained 
low. "Doesn't matter what you say," he mumbled in response to her cheery 
optimisms. "The craziness is in here and it drives me wild to think it could 
get out any minute, right now, and he would be in charge again." He had 
begun to characterize his "possessed", "angel" self as another person: in the 
Beckettian formula, _Not I. He_. His very own Mr. Hyde. Allie attempted to 
argue against such descriptions. "It isn't _he_, it's you, and when you're well, 
it won't be you any more." 

It didn't work. For a time, however, it looked as though the treatment was 
going to. Gibreel seemed calmer, more in control; the serial dreams were 
still there -- he would still speak, at night, verses in Arabic, a language he 
did not know: _tilk al-gharaniq al"ula wa inna shafa"ata-hunna la-turtaja_, 
for example, which turned out to mean (Allie, woken by his sleeptalk, wrote 
it down phonetically and went with her scrap of paper to the Brickhall 
mosque, where her recitation made a mullah's hair stand on end under his 
turban): "These are exalted females whose intercession is to be desired" -- 
but he seemed able to think of these nightshows as separate from himself, 
which gave both Allie and the Maudsley psychiatrists the feeling that Gibreel 
was slowly reconstructing the boundary wall between dreams and reality, 
and was on the road to recovery; whereas in fact, as it turned out, this 
separation was related to, was the same phenomenon as, his splitting of his 
sense of himself into two entities, one of which he sought heroically to 
suppress, but which he also, by characterizing it as other than himself, 
preserved, nourished, and secretly made strong. 

As for Allie, she lost, for a while, the prickly, wrong feeling of being stranded 
in a false milieu, an alien narrative; caring for Gibreel, investing in his brain, 
as she put it to herself, fighting to salvage him so that they could resume 
the great, exciting struggle of their love -- because they would probably 
quarrel all the way to the grave, she mused tolerantly, they'd be two old 
codgers flapping feebly at one another with rolled-up newspapers as they sat 
upon the evening verandas of their lives -- she felt more closely joined to 
him each day; rooted, so to speak, in his earth. It was some time since 
Maurice Wilson had been seen sitting among the chimneypots, calling her to 
her death. 

ooo 

Mr. "Whisky" Sisodia, that gleaming and charm-packed knee in spectacles, 
became a regular caller -- three or four visits a week -- during Gibreel's 
convalescence, invariably arriving with boxes full of goodies to eat. Gibreel 
had been literally fasting to death during his "angel period", and the medical 
opinion was that starvation had contributed in no small degree to his 
hallucinations. "So now we fafatten him up," Sisodia smacked his palms 
together, and once the invalid's stomach was up to it, "Whisky" plied him 
with delicacies: Chinese sweet—corn and chicken soup, Bombay-style bhel- 
puri from the new, chic but unfortunately named "Pagal Khana" restaurant 



whose "Crazy Food" (but the name could also be translated as _Madhouse_) 
had grown popular enough, especially among the younger set of British 
Asians, to rival even the long-standing pre-eminence of the Shaandaar Cafe, 
from which Sisodia, not wishing to show unseemly partisanship, also fetched 
eats -- sweetmeats, samosas, chicken patties -- for the increasingly 
voracious Gibreel. He brought, too, dishes made by his own hand, fish 
curries, raitas, sivayyan, khir, and doled out, along with the edibles, 
namedropping accounts of celebrity dinner parties: how Pavarotti had loved 
Whisky's lassi, and O but that poor James Mason had just adored his spicy 
prawns. Vanessa, Amitabh, Dustin, Sridevi, Christopher Reeve were all 
invoked. "One soosoo superstar should be aware of the tatastes of his pipi 
peers." Sisodia was something of a legend himself, Allie learned from Gibreel. 
The most slippery and silver-tongued man in the business, he had made a 
string of "quality" pictures on microscopic budgets, keeping going for over 
twenty years on pure charm and nonstop hustle. People on Sisodia projects 
got paid with the greatest difficulty, but somehow failed to mind. He had 
once quelled a cast revolt -- over pay, inevitably -- by whisking the entire 
unit off for a grand picnic in one of the most fabulous maharajah palaces in 
India, a place that was normally off limits to all but the high-born elite, the 
Gwaliors and Jaipurs and Kashmirs. Nobody ever knew how he fixed it, but 
most members of that unit had since signed up to work on further Sisodia 
ventures, the pay issue buried beneath the grandeur of such gestures. "And 
if he's needed he is always there," Gibreel added. "When Charulata, a 
wonderful dancer-actress he'd often used, needed the cancer treatment, 
suddenly years of unpaid fees materialized overnight." 
These days, thanks to a string of surprise box-office hits based on old fables 
drawn from the _Katha-Sarit-Sagar_ compendium -- the "Ocean of the 
Streams of Story", longer than the Arabian Nights and equally as 
fantasticated -- Sisodia was no longer based exclusively in his tiny office on 
Bombay's Readymoney Terrace, but had apartments in London and New 
York, and Oscars in his toilets. The story was that he carried, in his wallet, a 
photograph of the Hong Kong-based kung-phooey producer Run Run Shaw, 
his supposed hero, whose name he was quite unable to say. "Sometimes 
four Runs, sometimes a sixer," Gibreel told Allie, who was happy to see him 
laugh. "But I can't swear. It's only a media rumour." 

Allie was grateful for Sisodia's attentiveness. The famous producer appeared 
to have limitless time at his disposal, whereas Allie's schedule had just then 
grown very full. She had signed a promotional contract with a giant chain of 
freezer--food centres whose advertising agent, Mr. Hal Valance, told Allie 
during a power breakfast -- grapefruit, dry toast, decaf, all at Dorchester 
prices -- that her _profile_, "uniting as it does the positive parameters (for 
our client) of 'coldness' and 'cool', is right on line. Some stars end up being 
vampires, sucking attention away from the brand name, you understand, but 
this feels like real synergy." So now there were freezer-mart openings to cut 



ribbons at, and sales conferences, and advertising shots with tubs of 
softscoop icecream; plus the regular meetings with the designers and 
manufacturers of her autograph lines of equipment and leisurewear; and, of 
course, her fitness programme. She had signed on for Mr. Joshi's highly 
recommended martial arts course at the local sports centre, and continued, 
too, to force her legs to run five miles a day around the Fields, in spite of the 
soles-on-broken-glass pain. "No pop problem," Sisodia would send her off 
with a cheery wave. "I will iss iss issit here-only until you return. To be with 
Gigibreel is for me a pip pip privilege." She left him regaling Farishta with his 
inexhaustible anecdotes, opinions and general chitchat, and when she 
returned he would still be going strong. She came to identify several major 
themes; notably, his corpus of statements about The Trouble With The 
English. "The trouble with the Engenglish is that their hiss hiss history 
happened overseas, so they dodo don't know what it means." -- "The see 
secret of a dinner party in London is to ow ow outnumber the English. If 
they're outnumbered they bebehave; otherwise, you're in trouble." -- "Go to 
the Che Che Chamber of Horrors and you'll see what's rah rah wrong with 
the English. That's what they rereally like, caw corpses in bubloodbaths, 
mad barbers, etc. etc. etera. Their pay papers full of kinky sex and death. 
But they tell the whir world they're reserved, ist ist istiff upper lip and so on, 
and we're ist ist istupid enough to believe." Gibreel listened to this collection 
of prejudices with what seemed like complete assent, irritating Allie 
profoundly. Were these generalizations really all they saw of England? "No," 
Sisodia conceded with a shameless smile. "But it feels googood to let this ist 
ist istuff out." 

By the time the Maudsley people felt able to recommend a major reduction 
in Gibreel's dosages, Sisodia had become so much a fixture at his bedside, a 
sort of unofficial, eccentric and amusing layabout cousin, that when he 
sprung his trap Gibreel and Allie were taken completely by surprise. 

ooo 

He had been in touch with colleagues in Bombay: the seven producers whom 
Gibreel had left in the lurch when he boarded Air India's Flight 420, 
_Bostan_. "All are eel, elated by the news of your survival," he informed 
Gibreel. "Unf unf unfortunately, question of breach of contract ararises." 
Various other parties were also interested in suing the renascent Farishta for 
plenty, in particular a starlet named Pimple Billimoria, who alleged loss of 
earnings and professional damage. "Could urn amount to curcrores," Sisodia 
said, looking lugubrious. Allie was angry. "You stirred up this hornets' nest," 
she said. "I should have known: you were too good to be true." 
Sisodia became agitated. "Damn damn damn." 

"Ladies present," Gibreel, still a little drug-woozy, warned; but Sisodia 
windmilled his arms, indicating that he was trying to force words past his 
overexcited teeth. Finally: "Damage limitation. My intention. Not betrayal, 
you mumust not thithithink." 



To hear Sisodia tell it, nobody back in Bombay really wanted to sue Gibreel, 
to kill in court the goose that laid the golden eggs. All parties recognized 
that the old projects were no longer capable of being restarted: actors, 
directors, key crew members, even sound stages were otherwise committed. 
All parties further recognized that Gibreel's return from the dead was an 
item of a commercial value greater than any of the defunct films; the 
question was how to utilize it best, to the advantage of all concerned. His 
landing up in London also suggested the possibility of an international 
connection, maybe overseas funding, use of non— Indian locations, 
participation of stars "from foreign", etc.: in short, it was time for Gibreel to 
emerge from retirement and face the cameras again. "There is no 
chochoice," Sisodia explained to Gibreel, who sat up in bed trying to clear 
his head. "If you refuse, they will move against you _en bloc_, and not even 
your four four fortune could suffice. Bankruptcy, jajajail, funtoosh." 
Sisodia had talked himself into the hot seat: all the principals had agreed to 
grant him executive powers in the matter, and he had put together quite a 
package. The British-based entrepreneur Billy Battuta was eager to invest 
both in sterling and in "blocked rupees", the non-repatriable profits made by 
various British film distributors in the Indian subcontinent, which Battuta had 
taken over in return for cash payments in negotiable currencies at a 
knockdown (37-point discount) rate. All the Indian producers would chip in, 
and Miss Pimple Billimoria, to guarantee her silence, was to be offered a 
showcase supporting role featuring at least two dance numbers. Filming 
would be spread between three continents -- Europe, India, the North 
African coast. Gibreel got above-the--title billing, and three percentage 
points of producers' net profits . . . "Ten," Gibreel interrupted, "against two 
of the gross." His mind was obviously clearing. Sisodia didn't bat an eyelid. 
"Ten against two," he agreed. "Pre-publicity campaign to be as 
fofollows ..." 

"But what's the project?" Allie Cone demanded. Mr. "Whisky" Sisodia 
beamed from ear to ear. "Dear mamadam," he said. "He will play the 
archangel, Gibreel." 

ooo 

The proposal was for a series of films, both historical and contemporary, 
each concentrating on one incident from the angel's long and illustrious 
career: a trilogy, at least. "Don't tell me," Allie said, mocking the small 
shining mogul. "_Gibreel in Jahilia, Gibreel Meets the Imam, Gibreel with the 
Butterfly Girl_." Sisodia wasn't one bit embarrassed, but nodded proudly. 
"Stostorylines, draft scenarios, cacasting options are already well in haha 
hand." That was too much for Allie. "It stinks," she raged at him, and he 
retreated from her, a trembling and placatory knee, while she. pursued him, 
until she was actually chasing him around the apartment, banging into the 
furniture, slamming doors. "It exploits his sickness, has nothing to do with 
his present needs, and shows an utter contempt for his own wishes. He's 



retired; can't you people respect that? He doesn't want to be a star. And will 
you please stand still. I'm not going to eat you." 

He stopped running, but kept a cautious sofa between them. "Please see 
that this is imp imp imp," he cried, his stammer crippling his tongue on 
account of his anxiety. "Can the moomoon retire? Also, excuse, there are his 
seven sig sig sig. _Signatures_. Committing him absolutely. Unless and until 
you decide to commit him to a papapa." He gave up, sweating freely. 
"_A what?_" 

"Pagal Khana. Asylum. That would be another wwwway." 
Allie lifted a heavy brass inkwell in the shape of Mount Everest and prepared 
to hurl it. "You really are a skunk," she began, but then Gibreel was standing 
in the doorway, still rather pale, bony and hollow—eyed. "Alleluia," he said, 
"I am thinking that maybe I want this. Maybe I need to go back to work." 

ooo 

"Gibreel sahib! I can't tell you how delighted. A star is reborn." Billy Battuta 
was a surprise: no longer the hair-gel-and--fingerrings society column shark, 
he was unshowily dressed in brass-- buttoned blazer and blue jeans, and 
instead of the cocksure swagger Allie had expected there was an attractive, 
almost deferential reticence. He had grown a neat goatee beard which gave 
him a striking resemblance to the Christ—image on the Turin Shroud. 
Welcoming the three of them (Sisodia had picked them up in his limo, and 
the driver, Nigel, a sharp dresser from St Lucia, spent the journey telling 
Gibreel how many other pedestrians his lightning reflexes had saved from 
serious injury or death, punctuating these reminiscences with car— phone 
conversations in which mysterious deals involving amazing sums of money 
were discussed), Billy had shaken Allie's hand warmly, and then fallen upon 
Gibreel and hugged him in pure, infectious joy. His companion Mimi 
Mamoulian was rather less low-key. "It's all fixed," she announced. "Fruit, 
starlets, paparazzi, talk-- shows, rumours, little hints of scandal: everything 
a world figure requires. Flowers, personal security, zillion— pound contracts. 
Make yourselves at home." 

That was the general idea, Allie thought. Her initial opposition to the whole 
scheme had been overcome by Gibreel's own interest, which, in turn, 
prompted his doctors to go along with it, estimating that his restoration to 
his familiar milieu -- _going home_, in a way -- might indeed be beneficial. 
And Sisodia's purloining of the dream-narratives he'd heard at Gibreel's 
bedside could be seen as serendipitous: for once those stories were clearly 
placed in the artificial, fabricated world of the cinema, it ought to become 
easier for Gibreel to see them as fantasies, too. That Berlin Wall between the 
dreaming and waking state might well be more rapidly rebuilt as a result. 
The bottom line was that it was worth the try. 

Things (being things) didn't work out quite as planned. Allie found herself 
resenting the extent to which Sisodia, Battuta and Mimi moved in on 
Gibreel's life, taking over his wardrobe and daily schedules, and moving him 



out of Allie's apartment, declaring that the time for a "permanent liaison" 
was not yet ripe, "imagewise". After the stint at the Ritz, the movie star was 
given three rooms in Sisodia's cavernous, designer--chic flat in an old 
mansion block near Grosvenor Square, all Art Deco marbled floors and 
scumbling on the walls. Gibreel's own passive acceptance of these changes 
was, for Allie, the most infuriating aspect of all, and she began to 
comprehend the size of the step he'd taken when he left behind what was 
clearly second nature to him, and came hunting for her. Now that he was 
sinking back into that universe of armed bodyguards and maids with 
breakfast trays and giggles, would he dump her as dramatically as he had 
entered her life? Had she helped to engineer a reverse migration that would 
leave her high and dry? Gibreel stared out of newspapers, magazines, 
television sets, with many different women on his arm, grinning foolishly. 
She hated it, but he refused to notice. "What are you worrying?" he 
dismissed her, while sinking into a leather sofa the size of a small pick--up 
truck. "It's only photo opportunities: business, that's all." 
Worst of all : _he_ got jealous. As he came off the heavy drugs, and as his 
work (as well as hers) began to force separations upon them, he began to 
be possessed, once again, by that irrational, out-of— control suspiciousness 
which had precipitated the ridiculous quarrel over the Brunei cartoons. 
Whenever they met he would put her through the mill, interrogating her 
minutely: where had she been, who had she seen, what did he do, did she 
lead him on? She felt as if she were suffocating. His mental illness, the new 
influences in his life, and now this nightly thirddegree treatment: it was as 
though her real life, the one she wanted, the one she was hanging in there 
and fighting for, was being buried deeper and deeper under this avalanche 
of wrongnesses. _What about what I need_, she felt like screaming, _when 
do I get to set the terms?_ Driven to the very edge of her self—control, she 
asked, as a last resort, her mother's advice. In her father's old study in the 
Moscow Road house -- which Alicja had kept just the way Otto liked it, 
except that now the curtains were drawn back to let in what light England 
could come up with, and there were flower—vases at strategic points — 
Alicja at first offered little more than world-weariness. "So a woman's life- 
plans are being smothered by a man's," she said, not unkindly. "So welcome 
to your gender. I see it's strange for you to be out of control." And Allie 
confessed: she wanted to leave him, but found she couldn't. Not just 
because of guilt about abandoning a seriously unwell person; also because 
of "grand passion", because of the word that still dried her tongue when she 
tried to say it. "You want his child," Alicja put her finger on it. At first Allie 
blazed: "I want my child," but then, subsiding abruptly, blowing her nose, 
she nodded dumbly, and was on the verge of tears. 
"You want your head examining is what," Alicja comforted her. How long 
since they had been like this in one another's arms? Too long. And maybe it 
would be the last time... Alicja hugged her daughter, said: "So dry your eyes. 



Comes now the good news. Your affairs might be shot to ribbons, but your 
old mother is in better shape." 

There was an American college professor, a certain Boniek, big in genetic 
engineering. "Now don't start, dear, you don't know anything, it's not all 
Frankenstein and geeps, it has many beneficial applications," Alicja said with 
evident nervousness, and Allie, overcoming her surprise and her own red- 
rimmed unhappiness, burst into convulsive, liberating sobs of laughter; in 
which her mother joined. "At your age," Allie wept, "you ought to be 
ashamed." -- "Well, I'm not," the future Mrs. Boniek rejoined. "A professor, 
and in Stanford, California, so he brings the sunshine also. I intend to spend 
many hours working on my tan." 

ooo 

When she discovered (a report found by chance in a desk drawer at the 
Sisodia palazzo) that Gibreel had started having her followed, Allie did, at 
last, make the break. She scribbled a note — _This is killing me_ — slipped it 
inside the report, which she placed on the desktop; and left without saying 
goodbye. Gibreel never rang her up. He was rehearsing, in those days, for 
his grand public reappearance at the latest in a successful series of stage 
song-and-dance shows featuring Indian movie stars and staged by one of 
Billy Battuta's companies at Earls Court. He was to be the unannounced, 
surprise top-of-the-bill show-stopper, and had been rehearsing dance 
routines with the show's chorus line for weeks: also rcacquainting himself 
with the art of mouthing to playback music. Rumours of the identity of the 
Mystery Man or Dark Star were being carefully circulated and monitored by 
Battuta's promo men, and the Valance advertising agency had been hired to 
devise a series of "teaser" radio commercials and a local 48--sheet poster 
campaign. Gibreel's arrival on the Earls Court stage -- he was to be lowered 
from the flies surrounded by clouds of cardboard and smoke -- was the 
intended climax to the English segment of his re-entry into his superstardom; 
next stop, Bombay. Deserted, as he called it, by Alleluia Cone, he once more 
"refused to crawl"; and immersed himself in work. 

The next thing that went wrong was that Billy Battuta got himself arrested in 
New York for his Satanic sting. Allie, reading about it in the Sunday papers, 
swallowed her pride and called Gibreel at the rehearsal rooms to warn him 
against consorting with such patently criminal elements. "Battuta's a hood," 
she insisted. "His whole manner was a performance, a fake. He wanted to be 
sure he'd be a hit with the Manhattan dowagers, so he made us his tryout 
audience. That goatee! And a college blazer, for God's sake: how did we fall 
for it?" But Gibreel was cold and withdrawn; she had ditched him, in his 
book, and he wasn't about to take advice from deserters. Besides, Sisodia 
and the Battuta promo team had assured him -- and he had grilled them 
about it all right - 



- that Billy's problems had no relevance to the gala night (Filmmela, that 
was the name) because the financial arrangements remained solid, the 
monies for fees and guarantees had already been allocated, all the Bombay- 
-based stars had confirmed, and would participate as planned. "Plans fifilling 
up fast," Sisodia promised. "Shoshow must go on." 
The next thing that went wrong was inside Gibreel. 

ooo 

Sisodia's determination to keep people guessing about this Dark Star meant 
that Gibreel had to enter the Earls Court stage--door dressed in a burqa. So 
that even his sex remained a mystery. He was given the largest dressing- 
room -- a black five-pointed star had been stuck on the door -- and was 
unceremoniously locked in by the bespectacled genuform producer. In the 
dressing-room he found his angel-costume, including a contraption that, 
when tied around his forehead, would cause lightbulbs to glow behind him, 
creating the illusion of a halo; and a closed—circuit television, on which he 
would be able to watch the show -- Mithun and Kimi cavorting for the "disco 
diwane" set; Jayapradha and Rekha (no relation: the megastar, not a 
figment on a rug) submitting regally to on-stage interviews, in which Jaya 
divulged her views on polygamy while Rekha fantasized about alternative 
lives -- "If I'd been born out of India, I'd have been a painter in Paris"; 
heman stunts from Vinod and Dharmendra; Sridevi getting her sari wet -- 
until it was time for him to take up his position on a winch-operated 
"chariot" high above the stage. There was a cordless telephone, on which 
Sisodia called to tell him that the house was full -- "All sorts are here," he 
triumphed, and proceeded to offer Gibreel his technique of crowd analysis: 
you could tell the Pakistanis because they dressed up to the gills, the Indians 
because they dressed down, and the Bangladeshis because they dressed 
badly, "all that pupurple and pink and gogo gold gota that they like" -- and 
which otherwise remained silent; and, finally, a large gift-wrapped box, a 
little present from his thoughtful producer, which turned out to contain Miss 
Pimple Billimoria wearing a winsome expression and a quantity of gold 
ribbon. The movies were in town. 

ooo 

The strange feeling began -- that is, _returned_ -- when he was in 
the"chariot", waiting to descend. He thought of himself as moving along a 
route on which, any moment now, a choice would be offered him, a choice -- 
the thought formulated itself in his head without any help from him -- 
between two realities, this world and another that was also right there, 
visible but unseen. He felt slow, heavy, distanced from his own 
consciousness, and realized that he had not the faintest idea which path he 
would choose, which world he would enter. The doctors had been wrong, he 
now perceived, to treat him for schizophrenia; the splitting was not in him, 
but in the universe. As the chariot began its descent towards the immense, 
tidal roar that had begun to swell below him, he rehearsed his opening line - 



- _My name is Gibreel Farishta, and I'm back_ -- and heard it, so to speak, 
in stereo, because it, too, belonged in both worlds, with a different meaning 
in each; -- and now the lights hit him, he raised his arms high, he was 
returning wreathed in clouds, — and the crowd had recognized him, and his 
fellow-performers, too; people were rising from their seats, every man, 
woman and child in the auditorium, surging towards the stage, unstoppable, 
like a sea. -- The first man to reach him had time to scream out _Remember 
me, Gibreel? With the six toes? Maslama, sir: John Maslama. I kept secret 
your presence among us; but yes, I have been speaking out about the 
coming of the Lord, I have gone before you, a voice crying in the wilderness, 
the crooked shall be made straight and the rough places plain_ -- but then 
he had been dragged away, and the security guards were around Gibreel, 
_they're out of control, it's a fucking riot, you'll have to_ -- but he wouldn't 
go, because he'd seen that at least half the crowd were wearing bizarre 
headgear, rubber horns to make them look like demons, as if they were 
badges of belonging and defiance; -- and in that instant when he saw the 
adversary's sign he felt the universe fork and he stepped down the left-hand 
path. 

The official version of what followed, and the one accepted by all the news 
media, was that Gibreel Farishta had been lifted out of the danger area in 
the same winch-operated chariot in which he'd descended, and from which 
he hadn't had time to emerge; -- and that it would therefore have been easy 
for him to make his escape, from his isolated and unwatched place high 
above the melee. This version proved resilient enough to survive the 
"revelation" in the Voice that the assistant stage manager in charge of the 
winch had not, repeat not, set it in motion after it landed; -- that, in fact, 
the chariot remained grounded throughout the riot of the ecstatic film fans; - 

- and that substantial sums of money had been paid to the backstage staff 
to persuade them to collude in the fabrication of a story which, because 
totally fictional, was realistic enough for the newspaper-buying public to 
believe. However, the rumour that Gibreel Farishta had actually levitated 
away from the Earls Court stage and vanished into the blue under his own 
steam spread rapidly through the city's Asian population, and was fed by 
many accounts of the halo that had been seen streaming out from a point 
just behind his head. Within days of the second disappearance of Gibreel 
Farishta, vendors of novelties in Brickhall, Wembley and Brixton were selling 
as many toy haloes (green fluorescent hoops were the most popular) as 
headbands to which had been affixed a pair of rubber horns. 

ooo 

He was hovering high over London! -- Haha, they couldn't touch him now, 
the devils rushing upon him in that Pandemonium! -- He looked down upon 
the city and saw the English. The trouble with the English was that they 
were English: damn cold fish! -- Living underwater most of the year, in days 
the colour of night! -- Well: he was here now, the great Transformer, and 



this time there'd be some changes made -- the laws of nature are the laws 
of its transformation, and he was the very person to utilize the same! -- Yes, 
indeed: this time, clarity. 

He would show them -- yes! -- his _power_. -- These powerless English! -- 
Did they not think their history would return to haunt them? -- "The native is 
an oppressed person whose permanent dream is to become the persecutor" 
(Fanon). English women no longer bound him; the conspiracy stood exposed! 
-- Then away with all fogs. He would make this land anew. He was the 
Archangel, Gibreel. -- _And I'm back!_ 

The face of the adversary hung before him once again, sharpening, clarifying. 
Moony with a sardonic curl to the lips: but the name still eluded . . . _tcha_, 
like tea? _Shah_, a king? Or like a (royal? tea?) dance: _Shatchacha_. -- 
Nearly there. -- And the nature of the adversary: self--hating, constructing a 
false ego, auto--destructive. Fanon again: "In this way the individual" -- the 
Fanonian _native_ -- "accepts the disintegration ordained by God, bows 
down before the settler and his lot, and by a kind of interior restabilization 

acquires a stony calm." -- I "II give him stony calm!_ -- Native and settler, 

that old dispute, continuing now upon these soggy streets, with reversed 
categories. -- It occurred to him now that he was forever joined to the 
adversary, their arms locked around one another's bodies, mouth to mouth, 
head to tail, as when they fell to earth: when they settled. -- As things begin 
so they continue. -- Yes, he was coming closer. -- Chichi? Sasa? -- _My 
other, my love_ . . . 

. . . No! -- He floated over parkland and cried out, frightening the birds. -- 
No more of these England-induced ambiguities, these Biblical—Satanic 
confusions! -- Clarity, clarity, at all costs clarity! -- This Shaitan was no 
fallen angel. -- Forget those son-ofthe-morning fictions; this was no good 
boy gone bad, but pure evil. Truth was, he wasn't an angel at all! -- "He was 
of the djinn, so he transgressed." -- Quran 18 :50, there it was as plain as 
the day. -- How much more straightforward this version was! How much 
more practical, down—to—earth, comprehensible! -- Iblis/ Shaitan standing 
for the darkness, Gibreel for the light. -- Out, out with these sentimentalities: 
Joining, locking together, love_. Seek and destroy: that was all. 
. . . O most slippery, most devilish of cities! -- In which such stark, 
imperative oppositions were drowned beneath an endless drizzle of greys. -- 
How right he'd been, for instance, to banish those Satanico-Biblical doubts of 
his, -- those concerning God's unwillingness to permit dissent among his 
lieutenants, -- for as Iblis/Shaitan was no angel, so there had been no 
angelic dissidents for the Divinity to repress; -- and those concerning 
forbidden fruit, and God's supposed denial of moral choice to his creations; - 
- for nowhere in the entire Recitation was that Tree called (as the Bible had 
it) the root of the knowledge of good and evil. _It was simply a different 
Tree!_ Shaitan, tempting the Edenic couple, called it only "the Tree of 
Immortality" -- and as he was a liar, so the truth (discovered by inversion) 



was that the banned fruit (apples were not specified) hung upon the Death- 
Tree, no less, the slayer of men's souls. -- What remained now of that 
moralityfearing God? Where was He to be found? -- Only down below, in 
English hearts. -- Which he, Gibreel, had come to transform. 
Abracadabra! 
Hocus Pocus! 

But where should he begin? -- Well, then, the trouble with the English was 

their: 

Their: 

_In a word_, Gibreel solemnly pronounced, _their weather_. 
Gibreel Farishta floating on his cloud formed the opinion that the moral 
fuzziness of the English was meteorologically induced. "When the day is not 
warmer than the night," he reasoned, "when the light is not brighter than 
the dark, when the land is not drier than the sea, then clearly a people will 
lose the power to make distinctions, and commence to see everything — 
from political parties to sexual partners to religious beliefs -- as much— the— 
same, nothing-to-choose, give-or-take. What folly! For truth is extreme, it is 
_so_ and not _thus_, it is _him_ and not _her_; a partisan matter, not a 
spectator sport. It is, in brief, _heated_. City," he cried, and his voice rolled 
over the metropolis like thunder, "I am going to tropicalize you." 
Gibreel enumerated the benefits of the proposed metamorphosis of London 
into a tropical city: increased moral definition, institution of a national siesta, 
development of vivid and expansive patterns of behaviour among the 
populace, higherquality popular music, new birds in the trees (macaws, 
peacocks, cockatoos), new trees under the birds (coco— palms, tamarind, 
banyans with hanging beards). Improved street— life, outrageously coloured 
flowers (magenta, vermilion, neon-green), spidermonkeys in the oaks. A 
new mass market for domestic airconditioning units, ceiling fans, anti- 
mosquito coils and sprays. A coir and copra industry. Increased appeal of 
London as a centre for conferences, etc.; better cricketers; higher emphasis 
on ballcontrol among professional footballers, the traditional and soulless 
English commitment to "high workrate" having been rendered obsolete by 
the heat. Religious fervour, political ferment, renewal of interest in the 
intelligentsia. No more British reserve; hot-water bottles to be banished 
forever, replaced in the foetid nights by the making of slow and odorous love. 
Emergence of new social values: friends to commence dropping in on one 
another without making appointments, closure of old folks' homes, emphasis 
on the extended family. Spicier food; the use of water as well as paper in 
English toilets; the joy of running fully dressed through the first rains of the 
monsoon. Disadvantages: cholera, typhoid, legionnaires' disease, 
cockroaches, dust, noise, a culture of excess. 

Standing upon the horizon, spreading his arms to fill the sky, Gibreel cried: 
"Let it be." 

Three things happened, fast. 



The first was that, as the unimaginably colossal, elemental forces of the 
transformational process rushed out of his body (for was he not their 
_embodiment?_), he was temporarily overcome by a warm, spinning 
heaviness, a soporific churning (not at all unpleasant) that made him close, 
just for an instant, his eyes. 

The second was that the moment his eyes were shut the horned and goaty 
features of Mr. Saladin Chamcha appeared, on the screen of his mind, as 
sharp and well-defined as could be; accompanied, as if it were sub— titled 
there, by the adversary's name. 

And the third thing was that Gibreel Farishta opened his eyes to find himself 
collapsed, once again, on Alleluia Cone's doorstep, begging her forgiveness, 
weeping _0 God, it happened, it really happened again_. 

ooo 

She put him to bed; he found himself escaping into sleep, diving headlong 
into it, away from Proper London and towards Jahilia, because the real terror 
had crossed the broken boundary wall, and stalked his waking hours. 
"A homing instinct: one crazy heading for another," Alicja said when her 
daughter phoned with the news. "You must be putting out a signal, some 
sort of bleeping thing." As usual, she hid her concern beneath wisecracks. 
Finally she came out with it: "This time be sensible, Alleluia, okay? This time 
the asylum." 

"We'll see, mother. He's asleep right now." 

"So he isn't going to wake up?" Alicja expostulated, then controlled herself. 
"All right, I know, it's your life. Listen, isn't this weather something? They 
say it could last months: 'blocked pattern', I heard on television, rain over 
Moscow, while here it's a tropical heatwaye. I called Boniek at Stanford and 
told him: now we have weather in London, too." 



VI Return to Jahilia 



When Baal the poet saw a single teardrop the colour of blood emerging from 
the corner of the left eye of the statue of Al-Lat in the House of the Black 
Stone, he understood that the Prophet Mahound was on his way back to 
Jahilia after an exile of a quarter-century. He belched violently -- an 
affliction of age, this, its coarseness seeming to correspond to the general 
thickening induced by the years, a thickening of the tongue as well as the 
body, a slow congealment of the blood, that had turned Baal at fifty into a 
figure quite unlike his quick young self. Sometimes he felt that the air itself 
had thickened, resisting him, so that even a shortish walk could leave him 
panting, with an ache in his arm and an irregularity in his chest . . . and 
Mahound must have changed, too, returning as he was in splendour and 
omnipotence to the place whence he fled emptyhanded, without so much as 
a wife. Mahound at sixty-five. Our names meet, separate, and meet again, 
Baal thought, but the people going by the names do not remain the same. 
He left AILat to emerge into bright sunlight, and heard from behind his back 
a little snickering laugh. He turned, weightily; nobody to be seen. The hem 
of a robe vanishing around a corner. These days, down-at--heel Baal often 
made strangers giggle in the street. "Bastard!" he shouted at the top of his 
voice, scandalizing the other worshippers in the House. Baal, the decrepit 
poet, behaving badly again. He shrugged and headed for home. 
The city of Jahilia was no longer built of sand. That is to say, the passage of 
the years, the sorcery of the desert winds, the petrifying moon, the 
forgetfulness of the people and the inevitability of progress had hardened 
the town, so that it had lost its old, shifting, provisional quality of a mirage 
in which men could live, and become a prosaic place, quotidian and (like its 
poets) poor. Mahound's arm had grown long; his power had encircled Jahilia, 
cutting off its life--blood, its pilgrims and caravans. The fairs of Jahilia, these 
days, were pitiful to behold. Even the Grandee himself had acquired a 
theadbare look, his white hair as full of gaps as his teeth. His concubines 
were dying of old age, and he lacked the energy -- or, so the rumours 
murmured in the desultory alleys of the city, the need -- to replace them. 
Some days he forgot to shave, which added to his look of dilapidation and 
defeat. Only Hind was the same as ever. 

She had always had something of a reputation as a witch, who could wish 
illnesses upon you if you failed to bow down before her litter as it passed, an 
occultist with the power of transforming men into desert snakes when she 
had had her fill of them, and then catching them by the tail and having them 
cooked in their skins for her evening meal. Now that she had reached sixty 
the legend of her necromancy was being given new substantiation by her 
extraordinary and unnatural failure to age. While all around her hardened 



into stagnation, while the old gangs of Sharks grew middle—aged and 
squatted on Street corners playing cards and rolling dice, while the old knot- 
-witches and contortionists starved to death in the gullies, while a 
generation grew up whose conservatism and unquestioning worship of the 
material world was born of their knowledge of the probability of 
unemployment and penury, while the great city lost its sense of itself and 
even the cult of the dead declined in popularity to the relief of the camels of 
Jahilia, whose dislike of being left with severed hamstrings on human graves 
was easy to comprehend .. . while Jahilia decayed, in short, Hind remained 
unwrinkled, her body as firm as any young woman's, her hair as black as 
crow feathers, her eyes sparkling like knives, her bearing still haughty, her 
voice still brooking no opposition. Hind, not Simbel, ruled the city now; or so 
she undeniably believed. 

As the Grandee grew into a soft and pursy old age, Hind took to writing a 
series of admonitory and hortatory epistles or bulls to the people of the city. 
These were pasted up on every street in town. So it was that Hind and not 
Abu Simbel came to be thought of by Jahilians as the embodiment of the city, 
its living avatar, because they found in her physical unchangingness and in 
the unflinching resolve of her proclamations a description of themselves far 
more palatable than the picture they saw in the mirror of Simbel's crumbling 
face. Hind's posters were more influential than any poet's verses. She was 
still sexually voracious, and had slept with every writer in the city (though it 
was a long time since Baal had been allowed into her bed); now the writers 
were used up, discarded, and she was rampant. With sword as well as pen. 
She was Hind, who had joined the Jahilian army disguised as a man, using 
sorcery to deflect all spears and swords, seeking out her brothers' killer 
through the storm of war. Hind, who butchered the Prophet's uncle, and ate 
old Hamza's liver and his heart. 

Who could resist her? For her eternal youth which was also theirs; for her 
ferocity which gave them the illusion of being invincible; and for her bulls, 
which were refusals of time, of history, of age, which sang the city's 
undimmed magnificence and defied the garbage and decrepitude of the 
streets, which insisted on greatness, on leadership, on immortality, on the 
status of Jahilians as custodians of the divine ... for these writings the 
people forgave her her promiscuity, they turned a blind eye to the stories of 
Hind being weighed in emeralds on her birthday, they ignored rumours of 
orgies, they laughed when told of the size of her wardrobe, of the five 
hundred and eighty-one nightgowns made of gold leaf and the four hundred 
and twenty pairs of ruby slippers. The citizens of Jahilia dragged themselves 
through their increasingly dangerous streets, in which murder for small 
change was becoming commonplace, in which old women were being raped 
and ritually slaughtered, in which the riots of the starving were brutally put 
down by Hind's personal police force, the Manticorps; and in spite of the 



evidence of their eyes, stomachs and wallets, they believed what Hind 
whispered in their ears: Rule, Jahilia, glory of the world. 
Not all of them, of course. Not, for example, Baal. Who looked away from 
public affairs and wrote poems of unrequited love. 

Munching a white radish, he arrived home, passing beneath a dingy archway 
in a cracking wall. Here there was a small urinous courtyard littered with 
feathers, vegetable peelings, blood. There was no sign of human life: only 
flies, shadows, fear. These days it was necessary to be on one's guard. A 
sect of murderous hashashin roamed the city. Affluent persons were advised 
to approach their homes on the opposite side of the street, to make sure 
that the house was not being watched; when the coast was clear they would 
rush for the door and shut it behind them before any lurking criminal could 
push his way in. Baal did not bother with such precautions. Once he had 
been affluent, but that was a quarter of a century ago. Now there was no 
demand for satires -- the general fear of Mahound had destroyed the market 
for insults and wit. And with the decline of the cult of the dead had come a 
sharp drop in orders for epitaphs and triumphal odes of revenge. Times were 
hard all around. 

Dreaming of long-lost banquets, Baal climbed an unsteady wooden staircase 
to his small upstairs room. What did he have to steal? He wasn't worth the 
knife. Opening his door, he began to enter, when a push sent him tumbling 
to bloody his nose against the far wall. "Don't kill me," he squealed blindly. 
"O God, don't murder me, for pity's sake, O." 

The other hand closed the door. Baal knew that no matter how loudly he 
screamed they would remain alone, sealed off from the world in that 
uncaring room. Nobody would come; he himself, hearing his neighbour 
shriek, would have pushed his cot against the door. 

The intruder's hooded cloak concealed his face completely. Baal mopped his 
bleeding nose, kneeling, shaking uncontrollably. "I've got no money," he 
implored. "I've got nothing." Now the stranger spoke: "If a hungry dog looks 
for food, he does not look in the doghouse." And then, after a pause: "Baal. 
There's not much left of you. I had hoped for more." 
Now Baal felt oddly affronted as well as terrified. Was this some kind of 
demented fan, who would kill him because he no longer lived up to the 
power of his old work? Still trembling, he attempted self--deprecation. "To 
meet a writer is, usually, to be disappointed," he offered. The other ignored 
this remark. "Mahound is coming," he said. 

This flat statement filled Baal with the most profound terror. "What's that 
got to do with me?" he cried. "What does he want? It was a long time ago -- 
a lifetime -- more than a lifetime. What does he want? Are you from, are you 
sent by him?" 

"His memory is as long as his face," the intruder said, pushing back his hood. 
"No, I am not his messenger. You and I have something in common. We are 
both afraid of him." "I know you," Baal said. 



"Yes." 

"The way you speak. You're a foreigner." 

"'A revolution of water—carriers, immigrants and slaves,'" the stranger 
quoted. "Your words." 

"You're the immigrant," Baal remembered. "The Persian. Sulaiman." The 
Persian smiled his crooked smile. "Salman," he corrected. "Not wise, but 
peaceful." 

"You were one of the closest to him," Baal said, perplexed. 

"The closer you are to a conjurer," Salman bitterly replied, "the easier to 

spot the trick." 

And Gibreel dreamed this: 

At the oasis of Yathrib the followers of the new faith of Submission found 
themselves landless, and therefore poor. For many years they financed 
themselves by acts of brigandage, attacking the rich camel-trains on their 
way to and from Jahilia. Mahound had no time for scruples, Salman told Baal, 
no qualms about ends and means. The faithful lived by lawlessness, but in 
those years Mahound -- or should one say the Archangel Gibreel? -- should 
one say Al-Lah? — became obsessed by law. Amid the palm-trees of the 
oasis Gibreel appeared to the Prophet and found himself spouting rules, 
rules, rules, until the faithful could scarcely bear the prospect of any more 
revelation, Salman said, rules about every damn thing, if a man farts let him 
turn his face to the wind, a rule about which hand to use for the purpose of 
cleaning one's behind. It was as if no aspect of human existence was to be 
left unregulated, free. The revelation -- the _recitation_ -- told the faithful 
how much to eat, how deeply they should sleep, and which sexual positions 
had received divine sanction, so that they learned that sodomy and the 
missionary position were approved of by the archangel, whereas the 
forbidden postures included all those in which the female was on top. Gibreel 
further listed the permitted and forbidden subjects of conversation, and 
earmarked the parts of the body which could not be scratched no matter 
how unbearably they might itch. He vetoed the consumption of prawns, 
those bizarre other-worldly creatures which no member of the faithful had 
ever seen, and required animals to be killed slowly, by bleeding, so that by 
experiencing their deaths to the full they might arrive at an understanding of 
the meaning of their lives, for it is only at the moment of death that living 
creatures understand that life has been real, and not a sort of dream. And 
Gibreel the archangel specified the manner in which a man should be buried, 
and how his property should be divided, so that Salman the Persian got to 
wondering what manner of God this was that sounded so much like a 
businessman. This was when he had the idea that destroyed his faith, 
because he recalled that of course Mahound himself had been a 
businessman, and a damned successful one at that, a person to whom 
organization and rules came naturally, so how excessively convenient it was 
that he should have come up with such a very businesslike archangel, who 



handed down the management decisions of this highly corporate, if non- 
corporeal, God. 

After that Salman began to notice how useful and well timed the angel's 
revelations tended to be, so that when the faithful were disputing Mahound's 
views on any subject, from the possibility of space travel to the permanence 
of Hell, the angel would turn up with an answer, and he always supported 
Mahound, stating beyond any shadow of a doubt that it was impossible that 
a man should ever walk upon the moon, and being equally positive on the 
transient nature of damnation: even the most evil of doers would eventually 
be cleansed by hellfire and find their way into the perfumed gardens, 
Gulistan and Bostan. It would have been different, Salman complained to 
Baal, if Mahound took up his positions after receiving the revelation from 
Gibreel; but no, he just laid down the law and the angel would confirm it 
afterwards; so I began to get a bad smell in my nose, and I thought, this 
must be the odour of those fabled and legendary unclean creatures, what's 
their name, prawns. 

The fishy smell began to obsess Salman, who was the most highly educated 
of Mahound's intimates owing to the superior educational system then on 
offer in Persia. On account of his scholastic advancement Salman was made 
Mahound's official scribe, so that it fell to him to write down the endlessly 
proliferating rules. All those revelations of convenience, he told Baal, and the 
longer I did the job the worse it got. -- For a time, however, his suspicions 
had to be shelved, because the armies of Jahilia marched on Yathrib, 
determined to swat the flies who were pestering their camel—trains and 
interfering with business. What followed is well known, no need for me to 
repeat, Salman said, but then his immodesty burst out of him and forced 
him to tell Baal how he personally had saved Yathrib from certain 
destruction, how he had preserved Mahound's neck with his idea of a ditch. 
Salman had persuaded the Prophet to have a huge trench dug all the way 
around the unwalled oasis settlement, making it too wide even for the fabled 
Arab horses of the famous Jahilian cavalry to leap across. A ditch: with 
sharpened stakes at the bottom. When the Jahilians saw this foul piece of 
unsportsmanlike hole-digging their sense of chivalry and honour obliged 
them to behave as if the ditch had not been dug, and to ride their horses at 
it, full--tilt. The flower of Jahilia's army, human as well as equine, ended up 
impaled on the pointed sticks of Salman's Persian deviousness, trust an 
immigrant not to play the game. -- And after the defeat of Jahilia? Salman 
lamented to Baal: You'd have thought I'd have been a hero, I'm not a vain 
man but where were the public honours, where was the gratitude of 
Mahound, why didn't the archangel mention _me_ in despatches? Nothing, 
not a syllable, it was as if the faithful thought of my ditch as a cheap trick, 
too, an outlandish thing, dishonouring, unfair; as if their manhood had been 
damaged by the thing, as though I'd hurt their pride by saving their skins. I 



kept my mouth shut and said nothing, but I lost a lot of friends after that, I 
can tell you, people hate you to do them a good turn. 

In spite of the ditch of Yathrib, the faithful lost a good many men in the war 
against Jahilia. On their raiding sorties they lost as many lives as they 
claimed. And after the end of the war, hey presto, there was the Archangel 
Gibreel instructing the surviving males to marry the widowed women, lest by 
remarrying outside the faith they be lost to Submission. Oh, such a practical 
angel, Salman sneered to Baal. By now he had produced a bottle of toddy 
from the folds of his cloak and the two men were drinking steadily in the 
failing light. Salman grew ever more garrulous as the yellow liquid in the 
bottle went down; Baal couldn't recall when he'd last heard anyone talk up 
such a storm. O, those matter--of--fact revelations, Salman cried, we were 
even told it didn't matter if we were already married, we could have up to 
four marriages if we could afford it, well, you can imagine, the lads really 
went for that. 

What finally finished Salman with Mahound: the question of the women; and 
of the Satanic verses. Listen, I'm no gossip, Salman drunkenly confided, but 
after his wife's death Mahound was no angel, you understand my meaning. 
But in Yathrib he almost met his match. Those women up there: they turned 
his beard half-white in a year. The point about our Prophet, my dear Baal, is 
that he didn't like his women to answer back, he went for mothers and 
daughters, think of his first wife and then Ayesha: too old and too young, his 
two loves. He didn't like to pick on someone his own size. But in Yathrib the 
women are different, you don't know, here injahilia you're used to ordering 
your females about but up there they won't put up with it. When a man gets 
married he goes to live with his wife's people! Imagine! Shocking, isn't it? 
And throughout the marriage the wife keeps her own tent. If she wants to 
get rid of her husband she turns the tent round to face in the opposite 
direction, so that when he comes to her he finds fabric where the door 
should be, and that's that, he's out, divorced, not a thing he can do about it. 
Well, our girls were beginning to go for that type of thing, getting who 
knows what sort of ideas in their heads, so at once, bang, out comes the 
rule book, the angel starts pouring out rules about what women mustn't do, 
he starts forcing them back into the docile attitudes the Prophet prefers, 
docile or maternal, walking three steps behind or sitting at home being wise 
and waxing their chins. How the women of Yathrib laughed at the faithful, I 
swear, but that man is a magician, nobody could resist his charm; the 
faithful women did as he ordered them. They Submitted: he was offering 
them Paradise, after all. 

"Anyway," Salman said near the bottom of the bottle, "finally I decided to 
test him." 

One night the Persian scribe had a dream in which he was hovering above 
the figure of Mahound at the Prophet's cave on Mount Cone. At first Salman 
took this to be no more than a nostalgic reverie of the old days in Jahilia, but 



then it struck him that his point of view, in the dream, had been that of the 
archangel, and at that moment the memory of the incident of the Satanic 
verses came back to him as vividly as if the thing had happened the 
previous day. "Maybe I hadn't dreamed of myself as Gibreel," Salman 
recounted. "Maybe I was Shaitan." The realization of this possibility gave 
him his diabolic idea. After that, when he sat at the Prophet's feet, writing 
down rules rules rules, he began, surreptitiously, to change things. 
"Little things at first. If Mahound recited a verse in which God was described 
as _all-hearing, all-knowing_, I would write, _all-knowing, all-wise_. Here's 
the point: Mahound did not notice the alterations. So there I was, actually 
writing the Book, or rewriting, anyway, polluting the word of God with my 
own profane language. But, good heavens, if my poor words could not be 
distinguished from the Revelation by God's own Messenger, then what did 
that mean? What did that say about the quality of the divine poetry? Look, I 
swear, I was shaken to my soul. It's one thing to be a smart bastard and 
have half—suspicions about funny business, but it's quite another thing to 
find out that you're right. Listen: I changed my life for that man. I left my 
country, crossed the world, settled among people who thought me a slimy 
foreign coward for saving their, who never appreciated what I, but never 
mind that. The truth is that what! expected when I made that first tiny 
change, _all-wise_ instead of _all-hearing_ -- what I _wanted_ --was to read 
it back to the Prophet, and he'd say, What's the matter with you, Salman, 
arc you going deaf? And I'd say, Oops, O God, bit of a slip, how could I, and 
correct myself. But it didn't happen; and now I was writing the Revelation 
and nobody was noticing, and I didn't have the courage to own up. I was 
scared silly, I can tell you. Also: I was sadder than I have ever been. So I 
had to go on doing it. Maybe he'd just missed out once, I thought, anybody 
can make a mistake. So the next time I changed a bigger thing. He said 
_Christian_, I wrote down _Jew_. He'd notice that, surely; how could he not? 
But when I read him the chapter he nodded and thanked me politely, and I 
went out of his tent with tears in my eyes. After that I knew my days in 
Yathrib were numbered; but I had to go on doing it. I had to. There is no 
bitterness like that of a man who finds out he has been believing in a ghost. 
I would fall, I knew, but he would fall with me. So I went on with my 
devilment, changing verses, until one day I read my lines to him and saw 
him frown and shake his head as if to clear his mind, and then nod his 
approval slowly, but with a little doubt. I knew I'd reached the edge, and 
that the next time I rewrote the Book he'd know everything. That night I lay 
awake, holding his fate in my hands as well as my own. If I allowed myself 
to be destroyed I could destroy him, too. I had to choose, on that awful 
night, whether I preferred death with revenge to life without anything. As 
you see, I chose: life. Before dawn I left Yathrib on my camel, and made my 
way, suffering numerous misadventures I shall not trouble to relate, back 



tojahilia. And now Mahound is coming in triumph; so I shall lose my life after 

all. And his power has grown too great for me to unmake him now." 

Baal asked: "Why are you sure he will kill you?" 

Salman the Persian answered: "It's his Word against mine." 

ooo 

When Salman had slipped into unconsciousness on the floor, Baal lay on his 

scratchy straw—filled mattress, feeling the steel ring of pain around his 
forehead, the flutter of warning in his heart. Often his tiredness with his life 
had made him wish not to grow old, but, as Salman had said, to dream of a 
thing is very different from being faced with the fact of it. For some time 
now he had been conscious that the world was closing in around him. He 
could no longer pretend that his eyes were what they ought to be, and their 
dimness made his life even more shadowy, harder to grasp. All this blurring 
and loss of detail: no wonder his poetry had gone down the drain. His ears 
were getting to be unreliable, too. At this rate he'd soon end up sealed off 
from everything by the loss of his senses. . . but maybe he'd never get the 
chance. Mahound was coming. Maybe he would never kiss another woman. 
Mahound, Mahound. Why has this chatterbox drunk come to me, he thought 

angrily. What do I have to do with his treachery? Everyone knows why I 
wrote those satires years ago; he must know. How the Grandee threatened 

and bullied. I can't be held responsible. And anyway: who is he, that 
prancing sneering boy-wonder, Baal of the cutting tongue? I don't recognize 

him. Look at me: heavy, dull, nearsighted, soon to be deaf. Who do I 
threaten? Not a soul. He began to shake Salman: wake up, I don't want to 
be associated with you, you'll get me into trouble. 
The Persian snored on, sitting splay-legged on the floor with his back to the 
wall, his head hanging sideways like a doll"s; Baa!, racked by headache, fell 
back on to his cot. His verses, he thought, what had they been? _What kind 
of idea_ damn it, he couldn't even remember them properly _does 
Submission seem today_ yes, something like that, after all this time it was 
scarcely surprising _an idea that runs away_ that was the end anyhow. 
Mahound, any new idea is asked two questions. When it's weak: will it 
compromise? We know the answer to that one. And now, Mahound, on your 
return to Jahilia, time for the second question: How do you behave when 
you win? When your enemies are at your mercy and your power has become 
absolute: what then? We have all changed: all of us except Hind. Who 
seems, from what this drunkard says, more like a woman of Yathrib than 
Jahilia. No wonder the two of you didn't hit it off: she wouldn't be your 
mother or your child. 

As he drifted towards sleep, Baa! surveyed his own uselessness, his failed 
art. Now that he had abdicated all public platforms, his verses were full of 



loss: of youth, beauty, love, health, innocence, purpose, energy, certainty, 
hope. Loss of knowledge. Loss of money. The loss of Hind. Figures walked 
away from him in his odes, and the more passionately he called out to them 
the faster they moved. The landscape of his poetry was still the desert, the 
shifting dunes with the plumes of white sand blowing from their peaks. Soft 
mountains, uncompleted journeys, the impermanence of tents. How did one 
map a country that blew into a new form every day? Such questions made 
his language too abstract, his imagery too fluid, his metre too inconstant. It 
led him to create chimeras of form, lionheaded goatbodied serpenttailed 
impossibilities whose shapes felt obliged to change the moment they were 
set, so that the demotic forced its way into lines of classical purity and 
images of love were constantly degraded by the intrusion of elements of 
farce. Nobody goes for that stuff, he thought for the thousand and first time, 
and as unconsciousness arrived he concluded, comfortingly: Nobody 
remembers me. Oblivion is safety. Then his heart missed a beat and he 
came wide awake, frightened, cold. Mahound, maybe I'll cheat you of your 
revenge. He spent the night awake, listening to Salman's rolling, oceanic 
snores. 

Gibreel dreamed campfires: 

A famous and unexpected figure walks, one night, between the campfires of 
Mahound's army. Perhaps on account of the dark, -- or it might be because 
of the improbability of his presence here, — it seems that the Grandee of 
Jahilia has regained, in this final moment of his power, some of the strength 
of his earlier days. He has come alone; and is led by Khalid the erstwhile 
water—carrier and the former slave Bilal to the quarters of Mahound. 
Next, Gibreel dreamed the Grandee's return home: 

The town is full of rumours and there's a crowd in front of the house. After a 
time the sound of Hind's voice lifted in rage can be clearly heard. Then at an 
upper balcony Hind shows herself and demands that the crowd tear her 
husband into small pieces. The Grandee appears beside her; and receives 
loud, humiliating smacks on both cheeks from his loving wife. Hind has 
discovered that in spite of all her efforts she has not been able to prevent 
the Grandee from surrendering the city to Mahound. 
Moreover: Abu Simbel has embraced the faith. 

Simbel in his defeat has lost much of his recent wispiness. He permits Hind 
to strike him, and then speaks calmly to the crowd. He says: Mahound has 
promised that anyone within the Grandee's walls will be spared. "So come in, 
all of you, and bring your families, too." 

Hind speaks for the angry crowd. "You old fool. How many citizens can fit 
inside a single house, even this one? You've done a deal to save your own 
neck. Let them rip you up and feed you to the ants." 
Still the Grandee is mild. "Mahound also promises that all who are found at 
home, behind closed doors, will be safe. If you will not come into my home 
then go to your own; and wait." 



A third time his wife attempts to turn the crowd against him; this is a 
balcony scene of hatred instead of love. There can be no compromise with 
Mahound, she shouts, he is not to be trusted, the people must repudiate Abu 
Simbel and prepare to fight to the last man, the last woman. She herself is 
prepared to fight beside them and die for the freedom of Jahilia. "Will you 
merely lie down before this false prophet, this Dajjal? Can honour be 
expected of a man who is preparing to storm the city of his birth? Can 
compromise be hoped for from the uncompromising, pity from the pitiless? 
We are the mighty of Jahilia, and our goddesses, glorious in battle, will 
prevail." She commands them to fight in the name of Al-Lat. But the people 
begin to leave. 

Husband and wife stand on their balcony, and the people see them plain. For 
so long the city has used these two as its mirrors; and because, of late, 
Jahilians have preferred Hind's images to the greying Grandee, they are 
suffering, now, from profound shock. A people that has remained convinced 
of its greatness and invulnerability, that has chosen to believe such a myth 
in the face of all the evidence, is a people in the grip of a kind of sleep, or 
madness. Now the Grandee has awakened them from that sleep; they stand 
disoriented, rubbing their eyes, unable to believe at first -- if we are so 
mighty, how then have we fallen so fast, so utterly? -- and then belief comes, 
and shows them how their confidence has been built on clouds, on the 
passion of Hind's proclamations and on very little else. They abandon her, 
and with her, hope. Plunging into despair, the people of Jahilia go home to 
lock their doors. 

She screams at them, pleads, loosens her hair. "Come to the House of the 
Black Stone! Come and make sacrifice to Lat!" But they have gone. And Hind 
and the Grandee are alone on their balcony, while throughout Jahilia a great 
silence falls, a great stillness begins, and Hind leans against the wall of her 
palace and closes her eyes. 

It is the end. The Grandee murmurs softly: "Not many of us have as much 
reason to be scared of Mahound as you. If you eat a man's favourite uncle's 
innards, raw, without so much as salt or garlic, don't be surprised if he 
treats you, in turn, like meat." Then he leaves her, and goes down into the 
streets from which even the dogs have vanished, to unlock the city gates. 
Gibreel dreamed a temple: 

By the open gates of Jahilia stood the temple of Uzza. And Mahound spake 
unto Khalid who had been a carrier of water before, and now bore greater 
weights: "Go thou and cleanse that place." So Khalid with a force of men 
descended upon the temple, for Mahound was loth to enter the city while 
such abominations stood at its gates. 

When the guardian of the temple, who was of the tribe of Shark, saw the 
approach of Khalid with a great host of warriors, he took up his sword and 
went to the idol of the goddess. After making his final prayers he hung his 
sword about her neck, saying, "If thou be truly a goddess, Uzza, defend 



thyself and thy servant against the coming of Mahound." Then Khalid 
entered the temple, and when the goddess did not move the guardian said, 
"Now verily do I know that the God of Mahound is the true God, and this 
stone but a stone." Then Khalid broke the temple and the idol and returned 
to Mahound in his tent. And the Prophet asked: "What didst thou see?" 
Khalid spread his arms. "Nothing," said he. "Then thou hast not destroyed 
her," the Prophet cried. "Go again, and complete thy work." So Khalid 
returned to the fallen temple, and there an enormous woman, all black but 
for her long scarlet tongue, came running at him, naked from head to foot, 
her black hair flowing to her ankles from her head. Nearing him, she halted, 
and recited in her terrible voice of sulphur and hellfire: "Have you heard of 
Lat, and Manat, and Uzza, the Third, the Other? They are the Exalted 
Birds . . ." But Khalid interrupted her, saying, "Uzza, those are the Devil's 
verses, and you the Devil's daughter, a creature not to be worshipped, but 
denied." So he drew his sword and cut her down. 

And he returned to Mahound in his tent and said what he had seen. And the 
Prophet said, "Now may we come into Jahilia," and they arose, and came 
into the city, and possessed it in the Name of the Most High, the Destroyer 
of Men. 

ooo 

How many idols in the House of the Black Stone? Don't forget: three 
hundred and sixty. Sun-god, eagle, rainbow. The colossus of Hubal. Three 
hundred and sixty wait for Mahound, knowing they are not to be spared. And 
are not: but let's not waste time there. Statues fall; stone breaks; what's to 
be done is done. 

Mahound, after the cleansing of the House, sets up his tent or the old 
fairground. The people crowd around the tent, embracing the victorious faith. 
The Submission of Jahilia: this, too, is inevitable, and need not be lingered 
over. 

While Jahilians bow before him, mumbling their life-saving sentences, _there 
is no God but Al-I_ah_, Mahound whispers to Khalid. Somebody has not come 
to kneel before him; somebody long awaited. "Salman," the Prophet wishes 
to know. "Has he been found?" 
"Not yet. He's hiding; but it won't be long." 

There is a distraction. A veiled woman kneels before him, kissing his feet. 
"You must stop," he enjoins. "It is only God who must be worshipped." But 
what foot-kissery this is! Toe by toe, joint by joint, the woman licks, kisses, 
sucks. And Mahound, unnerved, repeats: "Stop. This is incorrect." Now, 
however, the woman is attending to the soles of his feet, cupping her hands 
beneath his heel ... he kicks out, in his confusion, and catches her in the 
throat. She falls, coughs, then prostrates herself before him, and says firmly: 
"There is no God but Al-Lah, and Mahound is his Prophet." Mahound calms 
himself, apologizes, extends a hand. "No harm will come to you," he assures 
her. "All who Submit are spared." But there is a strange confusion in him, 



and now he understands why, understands the anger, the bitter irony in her 
overwhelming, excessive, sensual adoration of his feet. The woman throws 
off her veil: Hind. "The wife of Abu Simbel," she announces clearly, and a 
hush falls. "Hind," Mahound says. "I had not forgotten." 
But, after a long instant, he nods. "You have Submitted. And are welcome in 
my tents." 

The next day, amid the continuing conversions, Salman the Persian is 
dragged into the Prophet's presence. Khalid, holding him by the ear, holding 
a knife at his throat, brings the immigrant snivelling and whimpering to the 
takht. "I found him, where else, with a whore, who was screeching at him 
because he didn't have the money to pay her. He stinks of alcohol." 
"Salman Farsi," the Prophet begins to pronounce the sentence of death, but 
the prisoner begins to shriek the qalmah: "La ilaha ilallah! La ilaha!" 
Mahound shakes his head. "Your blasphemy, Salman, can't be forgiven. Did 
you think I wouldn't work it out? To set your words against the Words of 
God." 

Scribe, ditch-digger, condemned man: unable to muster the smallest scrap 
of dignity, he blubbers whimpers pleads beats his breast abases himself 
repents. Khalid says: "This noise is unbearable, Messenger. Can I not cut off 
his head?" At which the noise increases sharply. Salman swears renewed 
loyalty, begs some more, and then, with a gleam of desperate hope, makes 
an offer. "I can show you where your true enemies are." This earns him a 
few seconds. The Prophet inclines his head. Khalid pulls the kneeling 
Salman's head back by the hair: "What enemies?" And Salman says a name. 
Mahound sinks deep into his cushions as memory returns. 
"Baal," he says, and repeats, twice: "Baal, Baal." 

Much to Khalid's disappointment, Salman the Persian is not sentenced to 
death. Bilal intercedes for him, and the Prophet, his mind elsewhere, 
concedes: yes, yes, let the wretched fellow live. O generosity of Submission! 
Hind has been spared; and Salman; and in all of Jahilia not a door has been 
smashed down, not an old foe dragged out to have his gizzard slit like a 
chicken's in the dust. This is Mahound's answer to the econd question: 
_What happens when you win?_ But one name haunts Mahound, leaps 
around him, young, sharp, pointing a long painted finger, singing verses 
whose cruel brilliance ensures their painfulness. That night, when the 
supplicants have gone, Khalid asks Mahound: "You're still thinking about 
him?" The Messenger nods, but will not speak. Khalid says: "I made Salman 
take me to his room, a hovel, but he isn't there, he's hiding out." Again, the 
nod, but no speech. Khalid presses on: "You want me to dig him out? 
Wouldn't take much doing. What d"you want done with him? This? This?" 
Khalid's finger moves first across his neck and then, with a sharp jab, into 
his navel. Mahound loses his temper. "You're a fool," he shouts at the former 
water-carrier who is now his military chief of staff. "Can't you ever work 
things out without my help?" 



Khalid bows and goes. Mahound falls asleep: his old gift, his way of dealing 
with bad moods. 

ooo 

But Khalid, Mahound's general, could not find Baal. In spite of door— to--door 
searches, proclamations, turnings of stones, the poet proved impossible to 
nab. And Mahound's lips remained closed, would not part to allow his wishes 
to emerge. Finally, and not without irritation, Khalid gave up the search. 
"Just let that bastard show his face, just once, any time," he vowed in the 
Prophet's tent of softnesses and shadows. "I'll slice him so thin you'll be able 
to see right through each piece." 

It seemed to Khalid that Mahound looked disappointed; but in the low light 
of the tent it was impossible to be sure. 

ooo 

Jahilia settled down to its new life: the call to prayers five times a day, no 
alcohol, the locking up of wives. Hind herself retired to her quarters . . . but 
where was Baal? 
Gibreel dreamed a curtain: 

The Curtain, _Hijab_, was the name of the most popular brothel in Jahilia, 
an enormous palazzo of date— palms in water— tinkling courtyards, 
surrounded by chambers that interlocked in bewildering mosaic patterns, 
permeated by labyrinthine corridors which had been deliberately decorated 
to look alike, each of them bearing the same calligraphic invocations to Love, 
each carpeted with identical rugs, each with a large stone urn positioned 
against a wall. None of The Curtain's clients could ever find their way, 
without help, either into the rooms of their favoured courtesan or back again 
to the street. In this way the girls were protected from unwanted guests and 
the business ensured payment before departure. Large Circassian eunuchs, 
dressed after the ludicrous fashion of lamp— genies, escorted the visitors to 
their goals and back again, sometimes with the help of balls of string. It was 
a soft windowless universe of draperies, ruled over by the ancient and 
nameless Madam of the Curtain whose guttural utterances from the secrecy 
of a chair shrouded in black veils had acquired, over the years, something of 
the oracular. Neither her staff nor her clients were able to disobey that 
sibylline voice that was, in a way, the profane antithesis of Mahound's sacred 
utterances in a larger, more easily penetrable tent not so very far away. So 
that when the raddled poet Baal prostrated himself before her and begged 
for help, her decision to hide him and save his life as an act of nostalgia for 
the beautiful, lively and wicked youth he had once been was accepted 
without question; and when Khalid's guards arrived to search the premises 
the eunuchs led them on a dizzy journey around that overground catacomb 
of contradictions and irreconcilable routes, until the soldiers' heads were 
spinning, and after looking inside thirty-nine stone urns and finding nothing 
but unguents and pickles they left, cursing heavily, never suspecting that 
there was a fortieth corridor down which they had never been taken, a 



fortieth urn inside which there hid, like a thief, the quivering, pajama- 
wetting poet whom they sought. 

After that the Madam had the eunuchs dye the poet's skin until it was blue- 
black, and his hair as well, and dressing him in the pantaloons and turban of 
a djinn she ordered him to begin a body-building course, since his lack of 
condition would certainly arouse suspicions if he didn't tone up fast. 

ooo 

Baal's sojourn "behind The Curtain" by no means deprived him of 
information about events outside; quite the reverse, in fact, because in the 
course of his eunuchly duties he stood guard outside the pleasure-chambers 
and heard the customers' gossip. The absolute indiscretion of their tongues, 
induced by the gay abandon of the whores' caresses and by the clients' 
knowledge that their secrets would be kept, gave the eavesdropping poet, 
myopic and hard of hearing as he was, a better insight into contemporary 
affairs than he could possibly have gained if he'd still been free to wander 
the newly puritanical streets of the town. The deafness was a problem 
sometimes; it meant that there were gaps in his knowledge, because the 
customers frequently lowered their voices and whispered; but it also 
minimized the prurient element in his listenings— in, since he was unable to 
hear the murmurings that accompanied fornication, except, of course, at 
such moments in which ecstatic clients or feigning workers raised their 
voices in cries of real or synthetic joy. 
What Baal learned at The Curtain: 

From the disgruntled butcher Ibrahim came the news that in spite of the 
new ban on pork the skin-deep converts of Jahilia were flocking to his back 
door to buy the forbidden meat in secret, "sales are up," he murmured while 
mounting his chosen lady, "black pork prices are high; but damn it, these 
new rules have made my work eough. A pig is not an easy animal to 
slaughter in secret, without noise," and thereupon he began some squealing 
of his own, for reasons, it is to be presumed, of pleasure rather than pain. -- 
And the grocer, Musa, confessed to another of The Curtain's horizontal staff 
that the old habits were hard to break, and when he was sure nobody was 
listening he still said a prayer or two to "my lifelong favourite, Manat, and 
sometimes, what to do, Al-Lat as well; you can't beat a female goddess, 
they've got attributes the boys can't match," after which he, too, fell upon 
the earthly imitations of these attributes with a will. So it was that faded, 
fading Baal learned in his bitterness that no imperium is absolute, no victory 
complete. And, slowly, the criticisms of Mahound began. 
Baal had begun to change. The news of the destruction of the great temple 
of Al-Lat at Taif, which came to his ears punctuated by the grunts of the 
covert pig-sticker Ibrahim, had plunged him into a deep sadness, because 
even in the high days of his young cynicism his love of the goddess had been 
genuine, perhaps his only genuine emotion, and her fall revealed to him the 
hollowness of a life in which the only true love had been felt for a lump of 



stone that couldn't fight back. When the first, sharp edge of grief had been 
dulled, Baal became convinced that Al-Lat's fall meant that his own end was 
not far away. He lost that strange sense of safety that life at The Curtain had 
briefly inspired in him; but the returning knowledge of his impermanence, of 
certain discovery followed by equally certain death, did not, interestingly 
enough, make him afraid. After a lifetime of dedicated cowardice he found to 
his great surprise that the effect of the approach of death really did enable 
him to taste the sweetness of life, and he wondered at the paradox of having 
his eyes opened to such a truth in that house of costly lies. And what was 
the truth? It was that Al-Lat was dead -- had never lived -- but that didn't 
make Mahound a prophet. In sum, Baal had arrived at godlessness. He 
began, stumblingly, to move beyond the idea of gods and leaders and rules, 
and to perceive that his story was so mixed up with Mahound's that some 
great resolution was necessary. That this resolution would in all probability 
mean his death neither shocked nor bothered him overmuch; and when 
Musa the grocer grumbled one day about the twelve wives" of the Prophet, 
_one rule for him, another for us_, Baal understood the form his final 
confrontation with Submission would have to take. 

The girls of The Curtain — it was only by convention that they were referred 
to as "girls", as the eldest was a woman well into her fifties, while the 
youngest, at fifteen, was more experienced than many fifty-year-olds -- had 
grown fond of this shambling Baal, and in point of fact they enjoyed having a 
eunuch-whowasn't, so that out of working hours they would tease him 
deliciously, flaunting their bodies before him, placing their breasts against 
his lips, twining their legs around his waist, kissing one another passionately 
just an inch away from his face, until the ashy writer was hopelessly aroused; 
whereupon they would laugh at his stiffness and mock him into blushing, 
quivering detumescence; or, very occasionally, and when he had given up all 
expectation of such a thing, they would depute one of their number to 
satisfy, free of charge, the lust they had awakened. In this way, like a 
myopic, blinking, tame bull, the poet passed his days, laying his head in 
women's laps, brooding on death and revenge, unable to say whether he 
was the most contented or the wretchedest man alive. 
It was during one of these playful sessions at the end of a working day, 
when the girls were alone with their eunuchs and their wine, that Baal heard 
the youngest talking about her client, the grocer, Musa. "That one!" she said. 
"He's got a bee in his bonnet about the Prophet's wives. He's so annoyed 
about them that he gets excited just by mentioning their names. He tells me 
that I personally am the spitting image of Ayesha herself, and she's His 
Nibs's favourite, as all are aware. So there." 

The fifty-year-old courtesan butted in. "Listen, those women in that harem, 
the men don't talk about anything else these days. No wonder Mahound 
secluded them, but it's only made things worse. People fantasize more about 
what they can't see." 



Especially in this town, Baal thought; above all in our Jahilia of the licentious 
ways, where until Mahound arrived with his rule book the women dressed 
brightly, and all the talk was of fucking and money, money and sex, and not 
just the talk, either. 

He said to the youngest whore: "Why don't you pretend for him?" 
"Who?" 

"Musa. If Ayesha gives him such a thrill, why not become his private and 
personal Ayesha?" 

"God," the girl said. "If they heard you say that they'd boil your balls in 
butter." 

How many wives? Twelve, and one old lady, long dead. How many whores 
behind The Curtain? Twelve again; and, secret on her black--tented throne, 
the ancient Madam, still defying death. Where there is no belief, there is no 
blasphemy. Baal told the Madam of his idea; she settled matters in her voice 
of a laryngitic frog. "It is very dangerous," she pronounced, "but it could be 
damn good for business. We will go carefully; but we will go." 
The fifteen-year-old whispered something in the grocer's ear. At once a light 
began to shine in his eyes. "Tell me everything," he begged. "Your childhood, 
your favourite toys, Solomon"s-horses and the rest, tell me how you played 
the tambourine and the Prophet came to watch." She told him, and then he 
asked about her deflowering at the age of twelve, and she told him that, and 
afterwards he paid double the normal fee, because "it's been the best time 
of my life". "We'll have to be careful of heart conditions," the Madam said to 
Baa!. 

ooo 

When the news got around Jahilia that the whores of The Curtain had each 
assumed the identity of one of Mahound's wives, the clandestine excitement 
of the city's males was intense; yet, so afraid were they of discovery, both 
because they would surely lose their lives if Mahound or his lieutenants ever 
found out that they had been involved in such irreverences, and because of 
their desire that the new service at The Curtain be maintained, that the 
secret was kept from the authorities. In those days Mahound had returned 
with his wives to Yathrib, preferring the cool oasis climate of the north to 
Jahilia's heat. The city had been left in the care of General Khalid, from 
whom things were easily concealed. For a time Mahound had considered 
telling Khalid to have all the brothels of Jahilia closed down, but Abu Simbel 
had advised him against so precipitate an act. "Jahilians are new converts," 
he pointed out. "Take things slowly." Mahound, most pragmatic of Prophets, 
had agreed to a period of transition. So, in the Prophet's absence, the men 
of Jahilia flocked to The Curtain, which experienced a three hundred per cent 
increase in business. For obvious reasons it was not politic to form a queue 
in the street, and so on many days a line of men curled around the 
innermost courtyard of the brothel, rotating about its centrally positioned 
Fountain of Love much as pilgrims rotated for other reasons around the 



ancient Black Stone. All customers of The Curtain were issued with masks, 
and Baal, watching the circling masked figures from a high balcony, was 
satisfied. There were more ways than one of refusing to Submit. 
In the months that followed, the staff of The Curtain warmed to the new 
task. The fifteen-year-old whore "Ayesha" was the most popular with the 
paying public, just as her namesake was with Mahound, and like the Ayesha 
who was living chastely in her apartment in the harem quarters of the great 
mosque at Yathrib, this Jahilian Ayesha began to be jealous of her 
preeminent status of Best Beloved. She resented it when any of her "sisters" 
seemed to be experiencing an increase in visitors, or receiving exceptionally 
generous tips. The oldest, fattest whore, who had taken the name of 
"Sawdah", would tell her visitors and she had plenty, many of the men of 
Jahilia seeking her out for her maternal and also grateful charms -- the story 
of how Mahound had married her and Ayesha, on the same day, when 
Ayesha was just a child. "In the two of us," she would say, exciting men 
terribly, "he found the two halves of his dead first wife: 
the child, and the mother, too." The whore "Hafsah" grew as hot-tempered 
as her namesake, and as the twelve entered into the spirit of their roles the 
alliances in the brothel came to mirror the political cliques at the Yathrib 
mosque; "Ayesha" and "Hafsah", for example, engaged in constant, petty 
rivalries against the two haughtiest whores, who had always been thought a 
bit stuck-up by the others and who had chosen for themselves the most 
aristocratic identities, becoming "Umm Salamah the Makhzumite" and, 
snootiest of all, "Ramlah", whose namesake, the eleventh wife of Mahound, 
was the daughter of Abu Simbel and Hind. And there was a "Zainab bint 
Jahsh", and a "Juwairiyah", named after the bride captured on a military 
expedition, and a "Rehana the Jew", a "Safia" and a "Maimunah", and, most 
erotic of all the whores, who knew tricks she refused to teach to competitive 
"Ayesha": the glamorous Egyptian, "Mary the Copt". Strangest of all was the 
whore who had taken the name of "Zainab bint Khuzaimah", knowing that 
this wife of Mahound had recently died. The necrophilia of her lovers, who 
forbade her to make any movements, was one of the more unsavoury 
aspects of the new regime at The Curtain. But business was business, and 
this, too, was a need that the courtesans fulfilled. 

By the end of the first year the twelve had grown so skilful in their roles that 
their previous selves began to fade away. Baal, more myopic and deafer by 
the month, saw the shapes of the girls moving past him, their edges blurred, 
their images somehow doubled, like shadows superimposed on shadows. 
The girls began to entertain new notions about Baal, too. In that age it was 
customary for a whore, on entering her profession, to take the kind of 
husband who wouldn't give her any trouble -- a mountain, maybe, or a 
fountain, or a bush — so that she could adopt, for form's sake, the title of a 
married woman. At The Curtain, the rule was that all the girls married the 
Love Spout in the central courtyard, but now a kind of rebellion was brewing, 



and the day came when the prostitutes went together to the Madam to 
announce that now that they had begun to think of themselves as the wives 
of the Prophet they required a better grade of husband than some spurting 
stone, which was almost idolatrous, after all; and to say that they had 
decided that they would all become the brides of the bumbler, Baal. At first 
the Madam tried to talk them out of it, but when she saw that the girls 
meant business she conceded the point, and told them to send the writer in 
to see her. With many giggles and nudges the twelve courtesans escorted 
the shambling poet into the throne room. When Baal heard the plan his 
heart began to thump so erratically that he lost his balance and fell, and 
"Ayesha" screamed in her fright: "O God, we're going to be his widows 
before we even get to be his wives." 

But he recovered: his heart regained its composure. And, having no option, 
he agreed to the twelvefold proposal. The Madam then married them all off 
herself, and in that den of degeneracy, that anti-mosque, that labyrinth of 
profanity, Baal became the husband of the wives of the former businessman, 
Mahound. 

His wives now made plain to him that they expected him to fulfil his 
husbandly duties in every particular, and worked out a rota system under 
which he could spend a day with each of the girls in turn (at The Curtain, 
day and night were inverted, the night being for business and the day for 
rest). No sooner had he embarked upon this arduous programme than they 
called a meeting at which he was told that he ought to start behaving a little 
more like the "real" husband, that is, Mahound. "Why can't you change your 
name like the rest of us?" bad-tempered "Hafsah" demanded, but at this 
Baal drew the line. "It may not be much to be proud of," he insisted, "but it's 
my name. What's more, I don't work with the clients here. There's no 
business reason for such a change." "Well, anyhow," the voluptuous "Mary 
the Copt" shrugged, "name or no name, we want you to start acting like 
him." 

"I don't know much about," Baal began to protest, but "Ayesha", who really 
was the most attractive of them all, or so he had commenced to feel of late, 
made a delightful moue. "Honestly, husband," she cajoled him. "It's not so 
tough. We just want you to, you know. Be the boss." 
It turned out that the whores of The Curtain were the most old-fashioned 
and conventional women in Jahilia. Their work, which could so easily have 
made them cynical and disillusioned (and they were, of course, capable of 
entertaining ferocious notions about their visitors), had turned them into 
dreamers instead. Sequestered from the outside world, they had conceived a 
fantasy of "ordinary life" in which they wanted nothing more than to be the 
obedient, and -- yes -- submissive helpmeets of a man who was wise, loving 
and strong. That is to say: the years of enacting the fantasies of men had 
finally corrupted their dreams, so that even in their hearts of hearts they 
wished to turn themselves into the oldest male fantasy of all. The added 



spice of acting out the home life of the Prophet had got them all into a state 
of high excitement, and the bemused Baal discovered what it was to have 
twelve women competing for his favours, for the beneficence of his smile, as 
they washed his feet and dried them with their hair, as they oiled his body 
and danced for him, and in a thousand ways enacted the dream—marriage 
they had never really thought they would have. 

It was irresistible. He began to find the confidence to order them about, to 
adjudicate between them, to punish them when he was angry. Once when 
their quarrelling irritated him he forswore them all for a month. When he 
went to see "Ayesha" after twenty-nine nights she teased him for not having 
been able to stay away. "That month was only twenty-nine days long," he 
replied. Once he was caught with "Mary the Copt" by "Hafsah", in "Hafsah's" 
quarters and on "Ayesha's" day. He begged "Hafsah" not to tell "Ayesha", 
with whom he had fallen in love; but she told her anyway and Baal had to 
stay away from "Mary" of the fair skin and curly hair for quite a time after 
that. In short, he had fallen prey to the seductions of becoming the secret, 
profane mirror of Mahound; and he had begun, once again, to write. 
The poetry that came was the sweetest he had ever written. Sometimes 
when he was with Ayesha he felt a slowness come over him, a heaviness, 
and he had to lie down. "It's strange," he told her. "It is as if I see myself 
standing beside myself. And I can make him, the standing one, speak; then 
I get up and write down his verses." These artistic slownesses of Baal were 
much admired by his wives. Once, tired, he dozed off in an armchair in the 
chambers of "Umm Salamah the Makhzumite". When he woke, hours later, 
his body ached, his neck and shoulders were full of knots, and he berated 
Umm Salamah: "Why didn't you wake me?" She answered: "I was afraid to, 
in case the verses were coming to you." He shook his head. "Don't worry 
about that. The only woman in whose company the verses come is 'Ayesha', 
not you." 

ooo 

Two years and a day after Baal began his life at The Curtain, one of Ayesha's 
clients recognized him in spite of the dyed skin, pantaloons and body- 
building exercises. Baal was stationed outside Ayesha's room when the client 
emerged, pointed right at him and shouted: "So this is where you got to!" 
Ayesha came running, her eyes blazing with fear. But Baal 



said, "It's all right. He won't make any trouble." He invited Salman the 
Persian to his own quarters and uncorked a bottle of the sweet wine made 
with uncrushed grapes which the Jahilians had begun to make when they 
found out that it wasn't forbidden by what they had started disrespectfully 
calling the Rule Book. 

"I came because I'm finally leaving this infernal city," Salman said, "and I 
wanted one moment of pleasure out of it after all the years of shit." After 
Bilal had interceded for him in the name of their old friendship the immigrant 
had found work as a letterwriter and all-purpose scribe, sitting cross—legged 
by the roadside in the main street of the financial district. His cynicism and 
despair had been burnished by the sun. "People write to tell lies," he said, 
drinking quickly. "So a professional liar makes an excellent living. My love 
letters and business correspondence became famous as the best in town 
because of my gift for inventing beautiful falsehoods that involved only the 
tiniest departure from the facts. As a result I have managed to save enough 
for my trip home in just two years. Home! The old country! I'm off tomorrow, 
and not a minute too soon." 

As the bottle emptied Salman began once again to talk, as Baa! had known 
he would, about the source of all his ills, the Messenger and his message. He 
told Baal about a quarrel between Mahound and Ayesha, recounting the 
rumour as if it were incontrovertible fact. "That girl couldn't stomach it that 
her husband wanted so many other women," he said. "He talked about 
necessity, political alliances and so on, but she wasn't fooled. Who can 
blame her? Finally he went into -- what else? -- one of his trances, and out 
he came with a message from the archangel. Gibreel had recited verses 
giving him full divine support. God's own permission to luck as many women 
as he liked. So there: what could poor Ayesha say against the verses of God? 
You know what she did say? This: 'Your God certainly jumps to it when you 
need him to fix things up for you.' Well! If it hadn't been Ayesha, who knows 
what he'd have done, but none of the others would have dared in the first 
place." Baal let him run on without interruption. The sexual aspects of 
Submission exercised the Persian a good deal: "Unhealthy," he pronounced. 
"All this segregation. No good will come of it." 

At length Baal did start arguing, and Salman was astonished to hear the 
poet taking Mahound's side: "You can see his point of view," Baal reasoned. 
"If families offer him brides and he refuses he creates enemies, -- and 
besides, he's a special man and one can see the argument for special 
dispensations, -- and as for locking them up, well, what a dishonour it would 
be if anything bad happened to one of them! Listen, if you lived in here, you 
wouldn't think a little less sexual freedom was such a bad thing, -- for the 
common people, I mean." 

"Your brain's gone," Salman said flatly. "You've been out of the sun too long. 
Or maybe that costume makes you talk like a clown." 



Baal was pretty tipsy by this time, and began some hot retort, but Salman 
raised an unsteady hand. "Don't want to fight," he said. "Lemme tell you 
instead. Hottest story in town. Whoowhoo! And it's relevant to whatch, 
whatchyou say." 

Salman's story: Ayesha and the Prophet had gone on an expedition to a far- 
flung village, and on the way back to Yathrib their party had camped in the 
dunes for the night. Camp was struck in the dark before the dawn. At the 
last moment Ayesha was obliged by a call of nature to rush out of sight into 
a hollow. While she was away her litter—bearers picked up her palanquin 
and marched off. She was a light woman, and, failing to notice much 
difference in the weight of that heavy palanquin, they assumed she was 
inside. Ayesha returned after relieving herself to find herself alone, and who 
knows what might have befallen her if a young man, a certain Safwan, had 
not chanced to pass by on his camel . . . Safwan brought Ayesha back to 
Yathrib safe and sound; at which point tongues began to wag, not least in 
the harem, where opportunities to weaken Ayesha's power were eagerly 
seized by her opponents. The two young people had been alone in the desert 
for many hours, and it was hinted, more and more loudly, that Safwan was a 
dashingly handsome fellow, and the Prophet was much older than the young 
woman, after all, and might she not therefore have been attracted to 
someone closer to her own age? "Quite a scandal," Salman commented, 
happily. 

"What will Mahound do?" Baal wanted to know. 
"O, he's done it," Salman replied. "Same as ever. He saw his pet, the 
archangel, and then informed one and all that Gibreel had exonerated 
Ayesha." Salman spread his arms in worldly resignation. "And this time, 
mister, the lady didn't complain about the convenience of the verses." 

ooo 

Salman the Persian left the next morning with a northbound camel-train. 
When he left Baal at The Curtain, he embraced the poet, kissed him on both 
cheeks and said: "Maybe you're right. Maybe it's better to keep out of the 
daylight. I hope it lasts." Baa! replied: "And I hope you find home, and that 
there is something there to love." Salman's face went blank. He opened his 
mouth, shut it again, and left. 

"Ayesha" came to Baal's room for reassurance. "He won't spill out the secret 
when he's drunk?" she asked, caressing Baal's hair. "He gets through a lot of 
wine." 

Baal said: "Nothing is ever going to be the same again." Salman's visit had 

wakened him from the dream into which he had slowly subsided during his 

years at The Curtain, and he couldn't go back to sleep. 

"Of course it will," Ayesha urged. "It will. You'll see." 

Baal shook his head and made the only prophetic remark of his life. 

"Something big is going to happen," he foretold. "A man can't hide behind 

skirts forever." 



The next day Mahound returned to Jahilia and soldiers came to inform the 
Madam of The Curtain that the period of transition was at an end. The 
brothels were to be closed, with immediate effect. Enough was enough. 
From behind her drapes, the Madam requested that the soldiers withdraw for 
an hour in the name of propriety to enable the guests to leave, and such 
was the inexperience of the officer in charge of the vice-squad that he 
agreed. The Madam sent her eunuchs to inform the girls and escort the 
clients out by a back door. "Please apologize to them for the interruption," 
she ordered the eunuchs, "and say that in the circumstances, no charge will 
be made." 

They were her last words. When the alarmed girls, all talking at once, 
crowded into the throne room to see if the worst were really true, she made 
no answer to their terrified questions, are we out of work, how do we eat, 
will we go to jail, what's to become of us, -- until "Ayesha" screwed up her 
courage and did what none of them had ever dared attempt. When she 
threw back the black hangings they saw a dead woman who might have 
been fifty or a hundred and twenty-five years old, no more than three feet 
tall, looking like a big doll, curled up in a cushionladen wickerwork chair, 
clutching the empty poison-bottle in her fist. 

"Now that you've started," Baal said, coming into the room, "you may as 
well take all the curtains down. No point trying to keep the sun out any 
more." 

ooo 

The young vice-squad officer, Umar, allowed himself to display a rather 
petulant bad temper when he found out about the suicide of the brothel- 
keeper. "Well, if we can't hang the boss, we'll just have to make do with the 
workers," he shouted, and ordered his men to place the "tarts" under close 
arrest, a task the men performed with zeal. The women made a noise and 
kicked out at their captors, but the eunuchs stood and watched without 
twitching a muscle, because Umar had said to them: "They want the cunts 
to be put on trial, but I've no instructions about you. So if you don't want to 
lose your heads as well as your balls, keep out of this." Eunuchs failed to 
defend the women of The Curtain while soldiers wrestled them to the ground; 
and among the eunuchs was Baa!, of the dyed skin and poetry. Just before 
the youngest "cunt" or "slit" was gagged, she yelled: "Husband, for God's 
sake, help us, if you are a man." The vice-squad captain was amused. 
"Which of you is her husband?" he asked, staring carefully into each turban- 
topped face. "Come on, own up. What's it like to watch the world with your 
wife?" 

Baal fixed his gaze on infinity to avoid "Ayesha's" glares as well as Umar's 
narrowed eyes. The officer stopped in front of him. "Is it you?" 
"Sir, you understand, it's just a term," Baal lied. "They like to joke, the girls. 
They call us their husbands because we, we. . 



Without warning, Umar grabbed him by the genitals and squeezed. "Because 
you can't be," he said. "Husbands, eh. Not bad." 

When the pain subsided, Baal saw that the women had gone. Umar gave the 
eunuchs a word of advice on his way out. "Get lost," he suggested. 
"Tomorrow I may have orders about you. Not many people get lucky two 
days running." 

When the girls of The Curtain had been taken away, the eunuchs sat down 
and wept uncontrollably by the Fountain of Love. But Baal, full of shame, did 
not cry. 

ooo 

Gibreel dreamed the death of Baal: 

The twelve whores realized, soon after their arrest, that they had grown so 
accustomed to their new names that they couldn't remember the old ones. 
They "were too frightened to give their jailers their assumed titles,, and as a 
result were unable to give any names at all. After a good deal of shouting 
and a good many threats the jailers gave in and registered them by numbers, 
as Curtain No. 1, Curtain No. 2 and so on. Their former clients, terrified of 
the consequences of letting slip the secret of what the whores had been up 
to, also remained silent, so that it is possible that nobody would have found 
out if the poet Baal had not started pasting his verses to the walls of the city 
jail. 

Two days after the arrests, the jail was bursting with prostitutes and pimps, 
whose numbers had increased considerably during the two years in which 
Submission had introduced sexual segregation to Jahilia. It transpired that 
many Jahilian men were prepared to countenance the jeers of the town riff- 
raff, to say nothing of possible prosecution under the new immorality laws, 
in order to stand below the windows of the jail and serenade those painted 
ladies whom they had grown to love. The women inside were entirely 
unimpressed by these devotions, and gave no encouragement whatsoever to 
the suitors at their barred gates. On the third day, however, there appeared 
among these lovelorn fools a peculiarly woebegone fellow in turban and 
pantaloons, with dark skin that was beginning to look decidedly blotchy. 
Many passers-by sniggered at the look of him, but when he began to sing his 
verses the sniggering stopped at once. Jahilians had always been 
connoisseurs of the art of poetry, and the beauty of the odes being sung by 
the peculiar gent stopped them in their tracks. Baal sang his love poems, 
and the ache in them silenced the other versifiers, who allowed Baal to 
speak for them all. At the windows of the jail, it was possible to see for the 
first time the 



faces of the sequestered whores, who had been drawn there by the magic of 
the lines. When he finished his recital he went forward to nail his poetry to 
the wall. The guards at the gates, their eyes running with tears, made no 
move to stop him. 

Every evening after that, the strange fellow would reappear and recite a new 
poem, and each set of verses sounded lovelier than the last. It was perhaps 
this surfeit of loveliness which prevented anybody from noticing, until the 
twelfth evening, when he completed his twelfth and final set of verses, each 
of which were dedicated to a different woman, that the names of his twelve 
"wives" were the same as those of another group of twelve. 
But on the twelfth day it was noticed, and at once the large crowd that had 
taken to gathering to hear Baal read changed its mood. Feelings of outrage 
replaced those of exaltation, and Baal was surrounded by angry men 
demanding to know the reasons for this oblique, this most byzantine of 
insults. At this point Baal took off his absurd turban. "I am Baal," he 
announced. "I recognize no jurisdiction except that of my Muse; or, to be 
exact, my dozen Muses." 
Guards seized him. 

The General, Khalid, had wanted to have Baa! executed at once, but 
Mahound asked that the poet be brought to trial immediately following the 
whores. So when Baal's twelve wives, who had divorced stone to marry him, 
had been sentenced to death by stoning to punish them for the immorality 
of their lives, Baal stood face to face with the Prophet, mirror facing image, 
dark facing light. Khalid, sitting at Mahound's right hand, offered Baa! a last 
chance to explain his vile deeds. The poet told the story of his stay at The 
Curtain, using the simplest language, concealing nothing, not even his final 
cowardice, for which everything he had done since had been an attempt at 
reparation. But now an unusual thing happened. The crowd packed into that 
tent of judgment, knowing that this was after all the famous satirist Baa!, in 
his day the owner of the sharpest tongue and keenest wit in Jahilia, began 
(no matter how hard it tried not to) to laugh. The more honestly and simply 
Baal described his marriages to the twelve "wives of the Prophet", the more 
uncontrollable became the horrified mirth of the audience. By the end of his 
speech the good folk of Jahilia were literally weeping with laughter, unable 
to restrain themselves even when soldiers with bullwhips and scimitars 
threatened them with instant death. 

"I'm not kidding!" Baal screeched at the crowd, which hooted yelled slapped 
its thighs in response. "It's no joke!" Ha ha ha. Until, at last, silence 
returned; the Prophet had risen to his feet. 

"In the old days you mocked the Recitation," Mahound said in the hush. 
"Then, too, these people enjoyed your mockery. Now you return to 
dishonour my house, and it seems that once again you succeed in bringing 
the worst out of the people." 
Baal said, "I've finished. Do what you want." 



So he was sentenced to be beheaded, within the hour, and as soldiers 
manhandled him out of the tent towards the killing ground, he shouted over 
his shoulder: "Whores and writers, Mahound. We are the people you can't 
forgive." 

Mahound replied, "Writers and whores. I see no difference here." 

ooo 

Once upon a time there was a woman who did not change. 
After the treachery of Abu Simbel handed Jahilia to Mahound on a plate and 
replaced the idea of the city's greatness with the reality of Mahound's, Hind 
sucked toes, recited the La-ilaha, and then retreated to a high tower of her 
palace, where news reached her of the destruction of the Al-Lat temple at 
Taif, and of all the statues of the goddess that were known to exist. She 
locked herself into her tower room with a collection of ancient books written 
in scripts which no other human being injahilia could decipher; and for two 
years and two months she remained there, studying her occult texts in 
secret, asking that a plate of simple food be left outside her door once a day 
and that her chamberpot be emptied at the same time. For two years and 
two months she saw no other living being. Then she entered her husband's 
bedroom at dawn, dressed in all her finery, with jewels glittering at her 
wrists, ankles, toes, ears and throat. "Wake up," she commanded, flinging 
back his curtains. "It's a day for celebrations." He saw that she hadn't aged 
by so much as a day since he last saw her; if anything, she looked younger 
than ever, which gave credence to the rumours which suggested that her 
witchcraft had persuaded time to run backwards for her within the confines 
of her tower room. "What have we got to celebrate?" the former Grandee of 
Jahilia asked, coughing up his usual morning blood. Hind replied: "I may not 
be able to reverse the flow of history, but revenge, at least, is sweet." 
Within an hour the news arrived that the Prophet, Mahound, had fallen into a 
fatal sickness, that he lay in Ayesha's bed with his head thumping as if it had 
been filled up with demons. Hind continued to make calm preparations for a 
banquet, sending servants to every corner of the city to invite guests. But of 
course nobody would come to a party on that day. In the evening Hind sat 
alone in the great hall of her home, amid the golden plates and crystal 
glasses of her revenge, eating a simple plate of couscous while surrounded 
by glistening, steaming, aromatic dishes of every imaginable type. Abu 
Simbel had refused to join her, calling her eating an obscenity. "You ate his 
uncle's heart," Simbel cried, "and now you would eat his." She laughed in his 
face. When the servants began to weep she dismissed them, too, and sat in 
solitary rejoicing while candles sent strange shadows across her absolute, 
uncompromising face. 
Gibreel dreamed the death of Mahound: 

For when the head of the Messenger began to ache as never before, he 
knew the time had come when he would be offered the Choice: 



Since no Prophet may die before he has been shown Paradise, and afterward 
asked to choose between this world and the next: 

So that as he lay with his head in his beloved Ayesha's lap, he closed his 
eyes, and life seemed to depart from him; but after a time he returned: 
And he said unto Ayesha, "I have been offered and made my Choice, and I 
have chosen the kingdom of God." 

Then she wept, knowing that he was speaking of his death; whereupon his 
eyes moved past her, and seemed to fix upon another figure in the room, 
even though when she, Ayesha, turned to look she saw only a lamp there, 
burning upon its stand: "Who's there?" he called out. "Is it Thou, Azraeel?" 
But Ayesha heard a terrible, sweet voice, that was a woman's, make reply: 
"No, Messenger of Al--I_ah, it is not Azraeel." 

And the lamp blew out; and in the darkness Mahound asked: "Is this 
sickness then thy doing, O Al— Lat?" 

And she said: "It is my revenge upon you, and I am satisfied. Let them cut a 
camel's hamstrings and set it on your grave." 

Then she went, and the lamp that had been snuffed out burst once more 
into a great and gentle light, and the Messenger murmured, "Still, I thank 
Thee, Al-Lat, for this gift." 

Not long afterwards he died. Ayesha went out into the next room, where the 
other wives and disciples were waiting with heavy hearts, and they began 
mightily to lament: 

But Ayesha wiped her eyes, and said: "If there be any here who worshipped 
the Messenger, let them grieve, for Mahound is dead; but if there be any 
here who worship God, then let them rejoice, for He is surely alive." 
It was the end of the dream. 



VII The Angel Azraeel 



1 



It all boiled down to love, reflected Saladin Chamcha in his den: love, the 
refractory bird of Meilhac and Halevy's libretto for _Carmen_ -- one of the 
prize specimens, this, in the Allegorical Aviary he'd assembled in lighter days, 
and which included among its winged metaphors the Sweet (of youth), the 
Yellow (more lucky than me), Khayyam—FitzGerald's adjectiveless Bird of 
Time (which has but a little way to fly, and lo! is on the Wing), and the 
Obscene; this last from a letter written by Henry James, Sr, to his sons. . . 
"Every man who has reached even his intellectual teens begins to suspect 
that life is no farce; that it is not genteel comedy even; that it flowers and 
fructifies on the contrary out of the profoundest tragic depths of the 
essential dearth in which its subject's roots are plunged. The natural 
inheritance of everyone who is capable of spiritual life is an unsubdued 
forest where the wolf howls and the obscene bird of night chatters." Take 
_that_, kids. -- And in a separate but proximate glass display—case of the 
younger, happier Chamcha's fancy there fluttered a captive from a piece of 
hit-parade bubblegum music, the Bright Elusive Butterfly, which shared 
_l"amour_ with the _oiseau rebelle_. 

Love, a zone in which nobody desirous of compiling a human (as opposed to 
robotic, Skinnerian-android) body of experience could afford to shut down 
operations, did you down, no question about it, and very probably did you in 
as well. It even warned you in advance. "Love is an infant of Bohemia," 
sings Carmen, herself the very Idea of the Beloved, its perfect pattern, 
eternal and divine, "and if you love me, look out for you." You couldn't ask 
for fairer. For his own part, Saladin in his time had loved widely, and was 
now (he had come to believe) suffering Love's revenges upon the foolish 
lover. Of the things of the mind, he had most loved the protean, 
inexhaustible culture of the Englishspeaking peoples; had said, when 
courting Pamela, that _Othello_, "just that one play", was worth the total 
output of any other dramatist in any other language, and though he was 
conscious of hyperbole, he didn't think the exaggeration very great. (Pamela, 
of course, made incessant efforts to betray her class and race, and so, 
predictably, professed herself horrified, bracketing Othello with Shylock and 
beating the racist Shakespeare over the head with the brace of them.) He 
had been striving, like the Bengali writer, Nirad Chaudhuri, before him -- 
though without any of that impish, colonial intelligence's urge to be seen as 
an enfant terrible -- to be worthy of the challenge represented by the phrase 
_Civis Britannicus sum_. Empire was no more, but still he knew "all that was 
good and living within him" to have been "made, shaped and quickened" by 



his encounter with this islet of sensibility, surrounded by the cool sense of 
the sea. -- Of material things, he had given his love to this city, London, 
preferring it to the city of his birth or to any other; had been creeping up on 
it, stealthily, with mounting excitement, freezing into a statue when it looked 
in his direction, dreaming of being the one to possess it and so, in a sense, 
become it, as when in the game of grandmother's footsteps the child who 
touches the one who's _it_ ("on it", today's young Londoners would say) 
takes over that cherished identity; as, also, in the myth of the Golden Bough. 
London, its conglomerate nature mirroring his own, its reticence also his; its 
gargoyles, the ghostly footfalls in its streets of Roman feet, the honks of its 
departing migrant geese. Its hospitality -- yes! -- in spite of immigration 
laws, and his own recent experience, he still insisted on the truth of that: an 
imperfect welcome, true, one capable of bigotry, but a real thing, 
nonetheless, as was attested by the existence in a South London borough of 
a pub in which no language but Ukrainian could be heard, and by the annual 
reunion, in Wembley, a stone's throw from the great stadium surrounded by 
imperial echoes -- Empire Way, the Empire Pool -- of more than a hundred 
delegates, all tracing their ancestry back to a single, small Goan village. -- 
"We Londoners can be proud of our hospitality," he'd told Pamela, and she, 
giggling helplessly, took him to see the Buster Keaton movie of that name, 
in which the comedian, arriving at the end of an absurd railway line, gets a 
murderous reception. In those days they had enjoyed such oppositions, and 
after hot disputes had ended up in bed.. . He returned his wandering 
thoughts to the subject of the metropolis. Its -- he repeated stubbornly to 
himself-- long history as a refuge, a role it maintained in spite of the 
recalcitrant ingratitude of the refugees' children; and without any of the 
selfcongratulatory huddled-masses rhetoric of the "nation of immigrants" 
across the ocean, itself far from perfectly open--armed. Would the United 
States, with its are-you-now-have-you-ever-beens, have permitted Ho Chi 
Minh to cook in its hotel kitchens? What would its McCarran--Walter Act have 
to say about a latter-- day Karl Marx, standing bushy—bearded at its gates, 
waiting to cross its yellow lines? O Proper London! Dull would he truly be of 
soul who did not prefer its faded splendours, its new hesitancies, to the hot 
certainties of that transatlantic New Rome with its Nazified architectural 
gigantism, which employed the oppressions of size to make its human 
occupants feel like worms . . . London, in spite of an increase in 
excrescences such as the NatWest Tower -- a corporate logo extruded into 
the third dimension -- preserved the human scale. _Viva! Zindabad!_ 
Pamela had always taken a caustic view of such rhapsodies. "These are 
museum-values," she used to tell him. "Sanctified, hanging in golden frames 
on honorific walls." She had never had any time for what endured. Change 
everything! Rip it up! He said: "If you succeed you will make it 



impossible for anybody like you, in one or two generations' time, to come 
along." She celebrated this vision of her own obsolescence. If she ended up 
like the dodo -- a stuffed relic, _Class Traitor, 1980s_ -- that would, she said, 
certainly suggest an improvement in the world. He begged to differ, but by 
this time they had begun to embrace: which surely was an improvement, so 
he conceded the other point. 

(One year, the government had introduced admission charges at museums, 
and groups of angry art-lovers picketed the temples of culture. When he saw 
this, Chamcha had wanted to get up a placard of his own and stage a one- 
man counter-protest. Didn't these people know what the stuff inside was 
_worth?_ There they were, cheerfully rotting their lungs with cigarettes 
worth more per packet than the charges they were protesting against; what 
they were demonstrating to the world was the low value they placed upon 
their cultural heritage. . . Pamela put her foot down. "Don't you dare," she 
said. She held the then—correct view: that the museums were _too 
valuable_ to charge for. So: "Don't you dare," and to his surprise he found 
he did not. He had not meant what he would have seemed to mean. He had 
meant that he would have given, maybe, in the right circumstances, his 

life for what was in those museums. So he could not take seriously these 

objections to a charge of a few pence. He quite saw, however, that this was 

an obscure and ill-defended position.) 

--_And of human beings, Pamela, I loved you_. -- 

Culture, city, wife; and a fourth and final love, of which he had spoken to 
nobody: the love of a dream. In the old days the dream had recurred about 
once a month; a simple dream, set in a city park, along an avenue of mature 
elms, whose overarching branches turned the avenue into a green tunnel 
into which the sky and the sunlight were dripping, here and there, through 
the perfect imperfections in the canopy of leaves. In this sylvan secrecy, 
Saladin saw himself, accompanied by a small boy of about five, whom he 
was teaching to ride a bicycle. The boy, wobbling alarmingly at first, made 
heroic efforts to gain and maintain his balance, with the ferocity of one who 
wishes his father to be proud of him. The dream-Chamcha ran along behind 
his imagined son, holding the bike upright by gripping the parcelrack over 
the rear wheel. Then he released it, and the boy (not knowing himself to be 
unsupported) kept going: balance came like a gift of flight, and the two of 
them were gliding down the avenue, Chamcha running, the boy pedalling 
harder and harder. "You did it!" Saladin rejoiced, and the equally elated child 
shouted back: "Look at me! See how quickly I learned! Aren't you pleased 
with me? Aren't you pleased?" It was a dream to weep at; for when he 
awoke, there was no bicycle and no child. 

"What will you do now?" Mishal had asked him amid the wreckage of the Hot 
Wax nightclub, and he'd answered, too lightly: "Me? I think I'll come back to 
life." Easier said than done; it was life, after all, that had rewarded his love 
of a dream—child with childlessness; his love of a woman, with her 



estrangement from him and her insemination by his old college friend; his 
love of a city, by hurling him down towards it from Himalayan heights; and 
his love of a civilization, by having him bedevilled, humiliated, broken upon 
its wheel. Not quite broken, he reminded himself; he was whole again, and 
there was, too, the example of Niccolo Machiavelli to consider (a wronged 
man, his name, like that of Muhammad-Mahon-Mahound, a synonym for evil; 
whereas in fact his staunch republicanism had earned him the rack, upon 
which he survived, was it three turns of the wheel? -- enough, at any rate, 
to make most men confess to raping their grandmothers, or anything else, 
just to make the pain go away; -- yet he had confessed to nothing, having 
committed no crimes while serving the Florentine republic, that all-- too- 
brief interruption in the power of the Medici family); if Niccolo could survive 
such tribulation and live to write that perhaps embittered, perhaps sardonic 
parody of the sycophantic mirror--of— princes literature then so much in 
vogue, _II Principe_, following it with the magisterial _Discorsi_, then he, 
Chamcha, need certainly not permit himself the luxury of defeat. 
Resurrection it was, then; roll back that boulder from the cave's dark mouth, 
and to hell with the legal problems. 

Mishal, Hanif Johnson and Pinkwalla -- in whose eyes Chamcha's 
metamorphoses had made the actor a hero, through whom the magic of 
special-effects fantasy-movies (_l_abyrinth_, _l_egend_, _Howard the Duck_) 
entered the Real -- drove Saladin over to Pamela's place in the DJ's van; this 
time, though, he squashed himself into the cab along with the other three. It 
was early afternoon; Jumpy would still be at the sports centre. "Good luck," 
said Mishal, kissing him, and Pinkwalla asked if they should wait. "No, 
thanks," Saladin replied. "When you've fallen from the sky, been abandoned 
by your friend, suffered police brutality, metamorphosed into a goat, lost 
your work as well as your wife, learned the power of hatred and regained 
human shape, what is there left to do but, as you would no doubt phrase it, 
demand your rights?" He waved goodbye. "Good for you," Mishal said, and 
they had gone. On the street corner the usual neighbourhood kids, with 
whom his relations had never been good, were bouncing a football off a 
lamp-post. One of them, an evil-looking piggy-eyed lout of nine or ten, 
pointed an imaginary video remote control at Chamcha and yelled: "Fast 
forward!" His was a generation that believed in skipping life's boring, 
troublesome, unlikable bits, going fast-forward from one action-packed 
climax to the next. _Welcome home_, Saladin thought, and rang the 
doorbell. 

Pamela, when she saw him, actually caught at her throat. "I didn't think 
people did that any more," he said. "Not since _Dr. Strangelove_." Her 
pregnancy wasn't visible yet; he inquired after it, and she blushed, but 
confirmed that it was going well. "So far so good." She was naturally off 
balance; the offer of coffee in the kitchen came several beats too late (she 
"stuck with" her whisky, drinking rapidly in spite of the baby); but in point of 



fact Chamcha felt one down (there had been a period in which he'd been an 
avid devotee of Stephen Potter's amusing little books) throughout this 
encounter. Pamela clearly felt that she ought to be the one in the bad 
position. She was the one who had wanted to break the marriage, who had 
denied him at least thrice; but he was as fumbling and abashed as she, so 
that they seemed to compete for the right to occupy the doghouse. The 
reason for Chamcha's discomfiture -- and he had not, let's recall, arrived in 
this awkward spirit, but in feisty, pugnacious mood -- was that he had 
realized, on seeing Pamela, with her too—bright brightness, her face like a 
saintly mask behind which who knows what worms feasted on rotting meat 
(he was alarmed by the hostile violence of the images arising from his 
unconscious), her shaven head under its absurd turban, her whisky breath, 
and the hard thing that had entered the little lines around her mouth, that 
he had quite simply fallen out of love, and would not want her back even 
should she want (which was improbable but not inconceivable) to return. 
The instant he became aware of this he commenced for some reason to feel 
guilty, and, as a result, at a conversational disadvantage. The white-haired 
dog was growling at him, too. He recalled that he'd never really cared for 
pets. 

"I suppose," she addressed her glass, sitting at the old pine table in the 
spacious kitchen, "that what I did was unforgivable, huh?" That little 
Americanizing _huh_ was new: another of her infinite series of blows against 
her breeding? Or had she caught it from Jumpy, or some hip little 
acquaintance of his, like a disease? (The snarling violence again: down with 
it. Now that he no longer wanted her, it was entirely inappropriate to the 
situation.) "I don't think I can say what I'm capable of forgiving," he replied. 
"That particular response seems to be out of my control; it either operates 
or it doesn't and I find out in due course. So let's say, for the moment, that 
the jury's out." She didn't like that, she wanted him to defuse the situation 
so that they could enjoy their blasted coffee. Pamela had always made vile 
coffee: still, that wasn't his problem now. "I'm moving back in," he said. "It's 
a big house and there's plenty of room. I'll take the den, and the rooms on 
the floor below, including the spare bathroom, so I'll be quite independent. I 
propose to use the kitchen very sparingly. I'm assuming that, as my body 
was never found, I'm still officially missingpresumed-dead, that you haven't 
gone to court to have me wiped off the slate. In which case it shouldn't take 
too long to resuscitate me, once I alert Bentine, Milligan and Sellers." 
(Respectively, their lawyer, their accountant and Chamcha's agent.) Pamela 
listened dumbly, her posture informing him that she wouldn't be offering any 
counter-arguments, that whatever he wanted was okay: making amends 
with body language. "After that," he concluded, "we sell up and you get your 
divorce." He swept out, making an exit before he got the shakes, and made 
it to his den just before they hit him. Pamela, downstairs, would be weeping; 



he had never found crying easy, but he was a champion shaker. And now 
there was his heart, too: boom badoom doodoodoom. 
_To be born again, first you have to die_. 

ooo 

Alone, he all at once remembered that he and Pamela had once disagreed, 
as they disagreed on everything, on a short--story they'd both read, whose 
theme was precisely the nature of the unforgivable. Title and author eluded 
him, but the story came back vividly. A man and a woman had been 
intimate friends (never lovers) for all their adult lives. On his twenty—first 
birthday (they were both poor at the time) she had given him, as a joke, the 
most horrible, cheap glass vase she could find, its colours a garish parody of 
Venetian gaiety. Twenty years later, when they were both successful and 
greying, she visited his home and quarrelled with him over his treatment of 
a mutual friend. In the course of the quarrel her eye fell upon the old vase, 
which he still kept in pride of place on his sitting-room mantelpiece, and, 
without pausing in her tirade, she swept it to the floor, smashing it beyond 
hope of repair. He never spoke to her again; when she died, half a century 
later, he refused to visit her deathbed or attend her funeral, even though 
messengers were sent to tell him that these were her dearest wishes. "Tell 
her," he said to the emissaries, "that she never knew how much I valued 
what she broke." The emissaries argued, pleaded, raged. If she had not 
known how much meaning he had invested in the trifle, how could she in all 
fairness be blamed? And had she not made countless attempts, over the 
years, to apologize and atone? And she was dying, for heaven's sake; could 
not this ancient, childish rift be healed at the last? They had lost a lifetime's 
friendship; could they not even say goodbye? "No," said the unforgiving man. 
— "Really because of the vase? Or are you concealing some other, darker 
matter?" — "It was the vase," he answered, "the vase, and nothing but." 
Pamela thought the man petty and cruel, but Chamcha had even then 
appreciated the curious privacy, the inexplicable inwardness of the issue. 
"Nobody can judge an internal injury," he had said, "by the size of the 
superficial wound, of the hole." 

_Sunt lacrimae rerum_, as the ex-teacher Sufyan would have said, and 
Saladin had ample opportunity in the next many days to contemplate the 
tears in things. He remained at first virtually immobile in his den, allowing it 
to grow back around him at its own pace, waiting for it to regain something 
of the solid comforting quality of its old self, as it had been before the 
altering of the universe. He watched a good deal of television with half an 
eye, channel-hopping compulsively, for he was a member of the remote- 
control culture of the present as much as the piggy boy on the street corner; 
he, too, could comprehend, or at least enter the illusion of comprehending, 
the composite video monster his button-pushing brought into being ... what 
a leveller this remote—control gizmo was, a Procrustean bed for the 
twentieth century; it chopped down the heavyweight and stretched out the 



slight until all the set's emissions, commercials, murders, game-- shows, the 
thousand and one varying joys and terrors of the real and the imagined, 
acquired an equal weight; -- and whereas the original Procrustes, citizen of 
what could now be termed a "hands-on" culture, had to exercise both brain 
and brawn, he, Chamcha, could lounge back in his Parker--Knoll recliner 
chair and let his fingers do the chopping. It seemed to him, as he idled 
across the channels, that the box was full of freaks: there were mutants -- 
"Mutts" -- on _Dr. Who_, bizarre creatures who appeared to have been 
crossbred with different types of industrial machinery: forage harvesters, 
grabbers, donkeys, jackhammers, saws, and whose cruel priest-chieftains 
were called _Mutilasians_; children's television appeared to be exclusively 
populated by humanoid robots and creatures with metamorphic bodies, 
while the adult programmes offered a continual parade of the misshapen 
human by-products of the newest notions in modern medicine, and its 
accomplices, modern disease and war. A hospital in Guyana had apparently 
preserved the body of a fully formed merman, complete with gills and scales. 
Lycanthropy was on the increase in the Scottish Highlands. The genetic 
possibility of centaurs was being seriously discussed. A sex--change 
operation was shown. -- He was reminded of an execrable piece of poetry 
which Jumpy Joshi had hesitantly shown him at the Shaandaar B and B. Its 
name, "I Sing the Body Eclectic", was fully representative of the whole. -- 
But the fellow has a whole body, after all, Saladin thought bitterly. He made 
Pamela's baby with no trouble at all: no broken sticks on his damn 
chromosomes. . . he caught sight of himself in a rerun of an old _Aliens 
Show_ "classic". (In the fast—forward culture, classic status could be 
achieved in as little as six months; sometimes even overnight.) The effect of 
all this box-watching was to put a severe dent in what remained of his idea 
of the normal, average quality of the real; but there were also countervailing 
forces at work. 

On _Gardeners' World_ he was shown how to achieve something called a 
"chimeran graft" (the very same, as chance would have it, that had been the 
pride of Otto Cone's garden); and although his inattention caused him to 
miss the names of the two trees that had been bred into one -- Mulberry? 
Laburnum? Broom? -- the tree itself made him sit up and take notice. There 
it palpably was, a chimera with roots, firmly planted in and growing 
vigorously out of a piece of English earth: a tree, he thought, capable of 
taking the metaphoric place of the one his father had chopped down in a 
distant garden in another, incompatible world. If such a tree were possible, 
then so was he; he, too, could cohere, send down roots, survive. Amid all 
the televisual images of hybrid tragedies -- the uselessness of mermen, the 
failures of plastic surgery, the Esperanto-like vacuity of much modern art, 
the Coca-Colonization of the planet -- he was given this one gift. It was 
enough. He switched off the set. 

Gradually, his animosity towards Gibreel lessened. Nor did horns, goat- 



hoofs, etc. show any signs of manifesting themselves anew. It seemed a 
cure was in progress. In point of fact, with the passage of the days not only 
Gibreel, but everything which had befallen Saladin of late that was 
irreconcilable with the prosiness of everyday life came to seem somehow 
irrelevant, as even the most stubborn of nightmares will once you've 
splashed your face, brushed your teeth and had a strong, hot drink. He 
began to make journeys into the outside world -- to those professional 
advisers, lawyer accountant agent, whom Pamela used to call "the Goons", 
and when sitting in the panelled, book- and ledgerlined stability of those 
offices in which miracles could plainly never happen he took to speaking of 
his "breakdown", -- "the shock of the accident", -- and so on, explaining his 
disappearance as though he had never tumbled from the sky, singing "Rule, 
Britannia" while Gibreel yowled an air from the movie _Shree 420_. He 
made a conscious effort to resume his old life of delicate sensibilities, taking 
himself off to concerts and art galleries and plays, and if his responses were 
rather dull; -- if these pursuits singularly failed to send him home in the 
state of exaltation which was the return he expected from all high art; -- 
then he insisted to himself that the thrill would soon return; he had had "a 
bad experience", and needed a little time. 

In his den, seated in the Parker-Knoll armchair, surrounded by his familiar 
objects -- the china pierrots, the mirror in the shape of a cartoonist's heart, 
Eros holding up the globe of an antique lamp -- he congratulated himself on 
being the sort of person who had found hatred impossible to sustain for long. 
Maybe, after all, love was more durable than hate; even if love changed, 
some shadow of it, some lasting shape, persisted. Towards Pamela, for 
example, he was now sure he felt nothing but the most altruistic affections. 
Hatred was perhaps like a finger-print upon the smooth glass of the sensitive 
soul; a mere grease-mark, which disappeared if left alone. Gibreel? Pooh! He 
was forgotten; he no longer existed. There; to surrender animosity was to 
become free. 

Saladin's optimism grew, but the red tape surrounding his return to life 
proved more obstructive than he expected. The banks were taking their time 
about unblocking his accounts; he was obliged to borrow from Pamela. Nor 
was work easy to come by. His agent, Charlie Sellers, explained over the 
phone: "Clients get funny. They start talking about zombies, they feel sort of 
unclean: as "if they were robbing a grave." Charlie, who still sounded in her 
early fifties like a disorganized and somewhat daffy young thing of the best 
county stock, gave the impression that she rather sympathized with the 
clients' point of view. "Wait it out," she advised. "They'll come round. After 
all, it isn't as if you were Dracula, for heaven's sake." Thank you, Charlie. 
Yes: his obsessive loathing of Gibreel, his dream of exacting some cruel and 
appropriate revenge, -- these were things of the past, aspects of a reality 
incompatible with his passionate desire to re—establish ordinary life. Not 
even the seditious, deconstructive imagery of television could deflect him. 



What he was rejecting was a portrait of himself and Gibreel as _monstrous_. 
Monstrous, indeed: the most absurd of ideas. There were real monsters in 
the world -- mass--murdering dictators, child rapists. The Granny Ripper. 
(Here he was forced to admit that in spite of his old, high estimate of the 
Metropolitan Police, the arrest of Uhuru Simba was just too darned neat.) 
You only had to open the tabloids any day of the week to find crazed 
homosexual Irishmen stuffing babies' mouths with earth. Pamela, naturally, 
had been of the view that "monster" was too -- what? -- _judgmental_ a 
term for such persons; compassion, she said, required that we see them as 
casualties of the age. Compassion, he replied, demanded that we see their 
victims as the casualties. "There's nothing to be done with you," she had 
said in her most patrician voice. "You actually do think in cheap debating 
points." 

And other monsters, too, no less real than the tabloid fiends: money, power, 
sex, death, love. Angels and devils — who needed them? "Why demons, 
when man himself is a demon?" the Nobel Laureate Singer's "last demon" 
asked from his attic in Tishevitz. To which Chamcha's sense of balance, his 
much-to-be-said-forand-against reflex, wished to add: "And why angels, 
when man is angelic too?" (If this wasn't true, how to explain, for instance, 
the Leonardo Cartoon? Was Mozart really Beelzebub in a powdered wig?) -- 
But, it had to be conceded, and this was his original point, that the 
circumstances of the age required no diabolic explanations. 

ooo 

I'm saying nothing. Don't ask me to clear things up one way or the other; 
the time of revelations is long gone. The rules of Creation are pretty clear: 
you set things up, you make them thus and so, and then you let them roll. 
Where's the pleasure if you're always intervening to give hints, change the 
rules, fix the fights? Well, I've been pretty self-controlled up to this point 
and I don't plan to spoil things now. Don't think I haven't wanted to butt in; 
I have, plenty of times. And once, it's true, I did. I sat on Alleluia Cone's bed 
and spoke to the superstar, Gibreel. _Ooparvala or Neechayvala_, he wanted 
to know, and I didn't enlighten him; I certainly don't intend to blab to this 
confused Chamcha instead. 
I'm leaving now. The man's going to sleep. 

ooo 

His reborn, fledgling, still—fallible optimism was hardest to maintain at night; 
because at night that otherworld of horns and hoofs was not so easily denied. 
There was the matter, too, of the two women who had started haunting his 
dreams. The first -- it was hard to admit this, even to himself-- was none 
other than the child-woman of the Shaandaar, his loyal ally in that 
nightmare time which he was now trying so mightily to conceal behind 
banalities and mists, the aficionada of the martial arts, Hanif Johnson's lover, 
Mishal Sufyan. 



The second -- whom he'd left in Bombay with the knife of his departure 
sticking in her heart, and who must still think him dead -- was Zeeny Vakil, 
ooo 

The jumpiness of Jumpy Joshi when he learned that Saladin Chamcha had 
returned, in human form, to reoccupy the upper storeys of the house in 
Notting Hill, was frightful to behold, and incensed Pamela more than she 
could say. On the first night -- she had decided not to tell him until they 
were safely in bed -- he leaped, on hearing the news, a good three feet clear 
of the bed and stood on the pale blue carpet, stark naked and quaking with 
his thumb stuck in his mouth. 

"Come back here and stop being foolish," she commanded, but he shook his 
head wildly, and removed his thumb long enough to gibber: "But if he's 
_here!_ In this _house!_ Then how can _I_ . . . ?" -- With which he snatched 
up his clothes in an untidy bundle, and fled from her presence; she heard 
thumps and crashes which suggested that his shoes, possibly accompanied 
by himself, had fallen down the stairs. "Good," she screamed after him. 
"Chicken, break your neck." 

Some moments later, however, Saladin was visited by the purple-faced 
figure of his estranged and naked-headed wife, who spoke thickly through 
clamped teeth. "J. J. is standing outside in the street. The damn fool says he 
can't come in unless you say it's okay with you." She had, as usual, been 
drinking. Chamcha, greatly astonished, more or less blurted out: "What 
about you, you want him to come in?" Which Pamela interpreted as his way 
of rubbing salt in the wound. Turning an even deeper shade of purple she 
nodded with humiliated ferocity. _Yes_. 

So it was that on his first night home, Saladin Chamcha went outside -- "Hey, 
hombre! You're really _well!_" Jumpy greeted him in terror, making as if to 
slap palms, to conceal his fear -- and persuaded his wife's lover to share her 
bed. Then he retreated upstairs, because Jumpy's mortification now 
prevented him from entering the house until Chamcha was safely out of the 
way. 

"What a man!" Jumpy wept at Pamela. "He's a _prince_, a _saint!_" 

"If you don't pack it in," Pamela Chamcha warned apoplectically, "I'll set the 

fucking dog on you." 

ooo 

Jumpy continued to find Chamcha's presence distracting, envisaging him (or 
so it appeared from his behaviour) as a minatory shade that needed to be 
constantly placated. When he cooked Pamela a meal (he had turned out, to 
her surprise and relief, to be quite a Mughlai chef) he insisted on asking 
Chamcha down to join them, and, when Saladin demurred, took him up a 
tray, explaining to Pamela that to do otherwise would be rude, and also 
provocative. "Look what he permits under his own roof! He's a _giant_; least 
we can do is have good manners." Pamela, with mounting rage, was obliged 
to put up with a series of such acts and their accompanying homilies. "I'd 



never have believed you were so conventional," she fumed, and Jumpy 
replied: "It's just a question of respect." 

In the name of respect, Jumpy carried Chamcha cups of tea, newspapers 
and mail; he never failed, on arriving at the big house, to go upstairs for a 
visit of at least twenty minutes, the minimum time commensurate with his 
sense of politeness, while Pamela cooled her heels and knocked back 
bourbon three floors below. He brought Saladin little presents: propitiatory 
offerings of books, old theatre handbills, masks. When Pamela attempted to 
put her foot down, he argued against her with an innocent, but also mulish 
passion: "We can't behave as if the man's invisible. He's here, isn't he? Then 
we must involve him in our lives." Pamela replied sourly: "Why don't you 
just ask him to come down and join us in bed?" To which Jumpy, seriously, 
replied: "I didn't think you'd approve." 

In spite of his inability to relax and take for granted Chamcha's residence 
upstairs, something in Jumpy Joshi was eased by receiving, in this unusual 
way, his predecessor's blessings. Able to reconcile the imperatives of love 
and friendship, he cheered up a good deal, and found the idea of fatherhood 
growing on him. One night he dreamed a dream that made him weep, the 
next morning, in delighted anticipation: a simple dream, in which he was 
running down an avenue of overarching trees, helping a small boy to ride a 
bicycle. "Aren't you pleased with me?" the boy cried in his elation. "Look: 
aren't you pleased?" 

ooo 

Pamela and Jumpy had both become involved in the campaign mounted to 
protest against the arrest of Dr. Uhuru Simba for the so-called Granny 
Ripper Murders. This, too, Jumpy went upstairs to discuss with Saladin. "The 
whole thing's completely trumped-up, based on circumstantial evidence and 
insinuations. Hanif reckons he can drive a truck through the holes in the 
prosecution case. It's just a straightforward malicious fit— up; the only 
question is how far they'll go. They'll verbal him for sure. Maybe there will 
even be witnesses saying they saw him do the slicing. Depends how badly 
they want to get him. Pretty badly, I'd say; he's been a loud voice around 
town for some while." Charncha recommended caution. Recalling Mishal 
Sufyan's loathing for Simba, he said: "The fellow has -- has he not? -- a 
record of violence towards women . . ." Jumpy turned his palms outward. "In 
his personal life," he owned, "the guy's frankly a piece of shit. But that 
doesn't mean he disembowels senior citizens; you don't have to be an angel 
to be innocent. Unless, of course, you're black." Chamcha let this pass. "The 
point is, this isn't personal, it's political," Jumpy emphasized, adding, as he 
got up to leave, "Urn, there's a public meeting about it tomorrow. Pamela 
and I have to go; please, I mean if you'd like, if you'd be interested, that is, 
come along if you want." 

"You asked him to go with us?" Pamela was incredulous. She had started to 
feel nauseous most of the time, and it did nothing for her mood. "You 



actually did that without consulting me?" Jumpy looked crestfallen. "Doesn't 
matter, anyhow," she let him off the hook. "Catch _him_ going to anything 
like _that_." 

In the morning, however, Saladin presented himself in the hall, wearing a 
smart brown suit, a camel coat with a silk collar, and a rather natty brown 
homburg hat. "Where are you off to?" Pamela, in turban, army--surplus 
leather jacket and tracksuit bottoms that revealed the incipient thickening of 
her middle, wanted to know. "Bloody Ascot?" "I believe I was invited to a 
meeting," Saladin answered in his least combative manner, and Pamela 
freaked. "You want to be careful," she warned him. "The way you look, you'll 
probably get fucking mugged." 

ooo 

What drew him back into the otherworld, into that undercity whose existence 
he had so long denied? -- What, or rather who, forced him by the simple fact 
of its (her) existence, to emerge from that cocoon-den in which he was 
being -- or so he believed -- restored to his former self, and plunge once 
more into the perilous (because uncharted) waters of the world and of 
himself? "I'll be able to fit in the meeting," Jumpy Joshi had told Saladin, 
"before my karate class." -- Where his star pupil waited: long, rainbow- 
haired and, Jumpy added, just past her eighteenth birthday. -- Not knowing 
that Jumpy, too, was suffering some of the same illicit longings, Saladin 
crossed town to be nearer to Mishal Sufyan. 

ooo 

He had expected the meeting to be small, envisaging a back room 
somewhere full of suspicious types looking and talking like clones of Malcolm 
X (Chamcha could remember finding funny a TV comic's joke -- "Then 
there's the one about the black man who changed his name to Mr. X and 
sued the _News of the World_ for libel" -- and provoking one of the worst 
quarrels of his marriage), with maybe a few angry-looking women as well; 
he had pictured much fist-clenching and righteousness. What he found was a 
large hall, the Brickhall Friends Meeting House, packed wall-to-wall with 
every conceivable sort of person -- old, wide women and uniformed 
schoolchildren, Rastas and restaurant workers, the staff of the small Chinese 
supermarket in Plassey Street, soberly dressed gents as well as wild boys, 
whites as well as blacks; the mood of the crowd was far from the kind of 
evangelical hysteria he'd imagined; it was quiet, worried, wanting to know 
what could be done. There was a young black woman standing near him who 
gave his attire an amused once-over; he stared back at her, and she 
laughed: "Okay, sorry, no offence." She was wearing a lenticular badge, the 
sort that changed its message as you moved. At some angles it read, 
_Uhuru for the Simba_; at others, _Freedom for the Lion_. "It's on account 
of the meaning of his chosen name," she explained redundantly. "In 
African." Which language? Saladin wanted to know. She shrugged, and 
turned away to listen to the speakers. It was African: born, by the sound of 



her, in Lewisham or Deptford or New Cross, that was all she needed to 
know . . . Pamela hissed into his ear. "I see you finally found somebody to 
feel superior to." She could still read him like a book. 
A minute woman in her middle seventies was led up on to the stage at the 
far end of the hail by a wiry man who, Chamcha was almost reassured to 
observe, really did look like an American Black Power leader, the young 
Stokely Carmichael, in fact -- the same intense spectacles -- and who was 
acting as a sort of compere. He turned out to be Dr. Simba's kid brother 
Walcott Roberts, and the tiny lady was their mother, Antoinette. "God knows 
how anything as big as Simba ever came out of her," Jumpy whispered, and 
Pamela frowned angrily, out of a new feeling of solidarity with all pregnant 
women, past as well as present. When Antoinette Roberts spoke, however, 
her voice was big enough to fill the room on lung-power alone. She wanted 
to talk about her son's day in court, at the committal proceedings, and she 
was quite a performer. Hers was what Chamcha thought of as an educated 
voice; she spoke in the BBC accents of one who learned her English diction 
from the World Service, but there was gospel in there, too, and hellfire 
sermonizing. "My son filled that dock," she told the silent room. "Lord, he 
filled it up. Sylvester -- you will pardon me if I use the name I gave him, not 
meaning to belittle the warrior's name he took for himself, but only out of 
ingrained habit -- Sylvester, he burst upwards from that dock like Leviathan 
from the waves. I want you to know how he spoke: he spoke loud, and he 
spoke clear. He spoke looking his adversary in the eye, and could that 
prosecutor stare him down? Never in a month of Sundays. And I want you to 
know what he said: 'I stand here,' my son declared, 'because I have chosen 
to occupy the old and honourable role of the uppity nigger. I am here 
because I have not been willing to seem reasonable. I am here for my 
ingratitude.' He was a colossus among the dwarfs. 'Make no mistake,' he 
said in that court, 'we are here to change things. I concede at once that we 
shall ourselves be changed; African, Caribbean, Indian, Pakistani, 
Bangladeshi, Cypriot, Chinese, we are other than what we would have been 
if we had not crossed the oceans, if our mothers and fathers had not crossed 
the skies in search of work and dignity and a better life for their children. We 
have been made again: but I say that we shall also be the ones to remake 
this society, to shape it from the bottom to the top. We shall be the hewers 
of the dead wood and the gardeners of the new. It is our turn now.' I wish 
you to think on what my son, Sylvester Roberts, Dr. Uhuru Simba, said in 
the place of justice. Think on it while we decide what we must do." 
Her son Walcott helped her leave the stage amid cheers and chants; she 
nodded judiciously in the direction of the noise. Less charismatic speeches 
followed. Hanif Johnson, Simba's lawyer, made a series of suggestions -- the 
visitors' gallery must be packed, the dispensers ofjustice must know that 
they were being watched; the court must be picketed, and a rota should be 
organized; there was the need for a financial appeal. Chamcha murmured to 



Jumpy: "Nobody mentions his history of sexual aggression." Jumpy 
shrugged. "Some of the women he's attacked are in this room. Mishal, for 
example, is over there, look, in the corner by the stage. But this isn't the 
time or place for that. Simba's bull craziness is, you could say, a trouble in 
the family. What we have here is trouble with the Man." In other 
circumstances, Saladin would have had a good deal to say in response to 
such a statement. -- He would have objected, for one thing, that a man's 
record of violence could not be set aside so easily when he was accused of 
murder. -- Also that he didn't like the use of such American terms as "the 
Man" in the very different British situation, where there was no history of 
slavery; it sounded like an attempt to borrow the glamour of other, more 
dangerous struggles, a thing he also felt about the organizers' decision to 
punctuate the speeches with such meaning—loaded songs as _We Shall 
Overcome_, and even, for Pete's sake, _Nkosi Sikelel" iAfri ka_. As if all 
causes were the same, all histories interchangeable. -- But he said none of 
these things, because his head had begun to spin and his senses to reel, 
owing to his having been given, for the first time in his life, a stupefying 
premonition of his death. 

— Hanif Johnson was finishing his speech. _As Dr. Simba has written, 
newness will enter this society by collective, not individual, actions_. He was 
quoting what Chamcha recognized as one of Camus's most popular slogans. 
_The passage from speech to moral action, Hanif was saying, has a name: 
to become human_. -- And now a pretty young British Asian woman with a 
slightly-toobulbous nose and a dirty, bluesy voice was launching into Bob 
Dylan's song, _I Pity the Poor Immigrants Another false and imported note, 
this: the song actually seemed rather hostile towards immigrants, though 
there were lines that struck chords, about the immigrant's visions shattering 
like glass, about how he was obliged to "build his town with blood". Jumpy, 
with his versifying attempts to redefine the old racist image of the rivers of 
blood, would appreciate that. -- All these things Saladin experienced and 
thought as if from a considerable distance. -- What had happened? This: 
when Jumpy Joshi pointed out Mishal Sufyan's presence at the Friends 
Meeting House, Saladin Chamcha, looking in her direction, saw a blazing fire 
burning in the centre of her forehead; and felt, in the same moment, the 
beating, and the icy shadow, of a pair of gigantic wings. — He experienced 
the kind of blurring associated with double vision, seeming to look into two 
worlds at once; one was the brightly lit, no-smoking-allowed meeting hall, 
but the other was a world of phantoms, in which Azraeel, the exterminating 
angel, was swooping towards him, and a girl's forehead could burn with 
ominous flames. -- _She's death to me, that's what it means_, Chamcha 
thought in one of the two worlds, while in the other he told himself not to be 
foolish; the room was full of people wearing those inane tribal badges that 
had latterly grown so popular, green neon haloes, devil-horns painted with 
fluorescent paint; Mishal probably had on some piece of space-age junk 



jewellery. -- But his other self took over again, _she's off limits to you_, it 
said, _not all possibilities are open to us. The world is finite; our hopes spill 
over its rim_. -- Whereupon his heart got in on the act, bababoom, boomba, 
dabadoom. 

Now he was outside, with Jumpy fussing over him and even Pamela showing 

concern. "I'm the one with the bun in the oven," she said with a gruff 

remnant of affection. "What business have you got to pass out?" Jumpy 

insisted: "You'd best come with me to my class; just sit quietly, and 

afterwards I'll take you home." -- But Pamela wanted to know if a doctor 

was required. _No, no, I'll go with Jumpy, I'll be fine. It was just hot in there. 

Airless. My clothes too warm. A stupid thing. A nothing_. 

There was an art cinema next to the Friends House, and he was leaning 

against a movie poster. The film was _Mephisto_, the story of an actor 

seduced into a collaboration with Nazism. In the poster, the actor -- played 

by the German star Klaus Maria Brandauer -- was dressed up as 

Mephistophilis, face white, body cloaked in black, arms upraised. Lines from 

_Faust_ stood above his head: 

--_Who art thou, then?_ 

--_Part of that Power, not understood_, 

_Which always wills the Bad, and always works the Good_. 

ooo 

At the sports centre: he could scarcely bring himself to glance in Mishal's 
direction. (She too had left the Simba meeting in time to make the class.) -- 
Although she was all over him, _you came back, I bet it was to see me, isn't 
that nice_, he could hardly speak a civil word, much less ask _were you 
wearing a luminous something in the middle of your_, because she wasn't 
now, kicking her legs and flexing her long body, resplendent in its black 
leotard. — Until, sensing the coldness in him, she backed off, all confusion 
and injured pride. 

"Our other star hasn't turned up today," Jumpy mentioned to Saladin during 
a break in the exercises. "Miss Alleluia Cone, the one who climbed Everest. I 
was meaning to introduce you two. She knows, I mean, she's apparently 
with, Gibreel. Gibreel Farishta, the actor, your fellow— survivor of the crash." 
_Things are closing in on me_. Gibreel was drifting towards him, like India 
when, having come unstuck from the Gondwanaland proto—continent, it 
floated towards Laurasia. (His processes of mind, he recognized absently, 
were coming up with some pretty strange associations.) When they collided, 
the force would hurl up Himalayas. -- What is a mountain? An obstacle; a 
transcendence; above all, an _effect_. "Where are you going?" Jumpy was 
calling. "I thought I was giving you a lift. Are you okay?" 
_I'm fine. I need to walk, that's all_. 
"Okay, but only if you're sure." 

_Sure_. Walk away fast, without catching Mishal's aggrieved eye. 



. . . In the street. Walk quickly, out of this wrong place, this underworld. -- 
God: no escape. Here's a shop-front, a store selling musical instruments, 
trumpets saxophones oboes, what's the name? -- _Fair Winds_, and here in 
the window is a cheaply printed handbill. Announcing the imminent return of, 
that's right, the Archangel Gibreel. His return and the salvation of the earth. 
_Walk. Walk away fast_. 

. . . Hail this taxi. (His clothes inspire deference in the driver.) Climb in 
squire do you mind the radio. Some scientist who got caught in that 
hijacking and lost the halfof his tongue. American. They rebuilt it, he says, 
with flesh taken from his posterior, excuse my French. Wouldn't fancy a 
mouthful of my own buttock meat myself but the poor bugger had no option 
did he. Funny bastard. Got some funny ideas. 

Eugene Dumsday on the radio discussed the gaps in the fossil record with 
his new, buttocky tongue. _The Devil tried to silence me but the good Lord 
and American surgical techniques knew better_. These gaps were the 
creationist's main selling—point: if natural selection was the truth, where 
were all the random mutations that got deselected? Where were the 
monster—children, the deformed babies of evolution? The fossils were silent. 
No three-legged horses there. _No point arguing with these geezers_, the 
cabbie said. _I don't hold with God myself_. No point, one small part of 
Chamcha's consciousness agreed. No point suggesting that "the fossil 
record" wasn't some sort of perfect filing cabinet. And evolution theory had 
come a long way since Darwin. It was now being argued that major changes 
in species happened not in the stumbling, hit-andmiss manner first 
envisaged, but in great, radical leaps. The history of life was not the 
bumbling progress -- the very English middleclass progress -- Victorian 
thought had wanted it to be, but violent, a thing of dramatic, cumulative 
transformations: in the old formulation, more revolution than evolution. -- 
I've heard enough, the cabbie said. Eugene Dumsday vanished from the 
ether, to be replaced by disco music. _Ave atque vale_. 
What Saladin Chamcha understood that day was that he had been living in a 
state of phoney peace, that the change in him was irreversible. A new, dark 
world had opened up for him (or: within him) when he fell from the sky; no 
matter how assiduously he attempted to re— create his old existence, this 
was, he now saw, a fact that could not be unmade. He seemed to see a road 
before him, forking to left and right. Closing his eyes, settling back against 
taxicab upholstery, he chose the left— hand path. 

2 

The temperature continued to rise; and when the heatwave reached its 
highest point, and stayed up there so long that the whole city, its edifices, 
its waterways, its inhabitants, came perilously close to the boil, — then Mr. 
Billy Battuta and his companion Mimi Mamoulian, recently returned to the 
metropolis after a period as guests of the penal authority of New York, 



announced their "grand coming-out" party. Billy's business connections 
downtown had arranged for his case to be heard by a well-disposed judge; 
his personal charm had persuaded every one of the wealthy female "marks" 
from whom he'd extracted such generous amounts for the purpose of the re- 
purchase of his soul from the Devil (including Mrs. Struwelpeter) to sign a 
clemency petition, in which the matrons stated their conviction that Mr. 
Battuta had honestly repented him of his error, and asked, in the light of his 
vow to concentrate henceforth on his startlingly brilliant entrepreneurial 
career (whose social usefulness in terms of wealth creation and the provision 
of employment to many persons, they suggested, should also be considered 
by the court in mitigation of his offences), and his further vow to undergo a 
full course of psychiatric treatment to help him overcome his weakness for 
criminal capers, -- that the worthy judge settle upon some lighter 
punishment than a prison sentence, "the deterrent purpose underlying such 
incarceration being better served here," in the ladies' opinion, "by a 
judgment of a more Christian sort". Mimi, adjudged to be no more than 
Billy's love-duped underling, was given a suspended sentence; for Billy it 
was deportation, and a stiff fine, but even this was rendered considerably 
less severe by the judge's consent to Billy's attorney's plea that his client be 
allowed to leave the country voluntarily, without having the stigma of a 
deportation order stamped into his passport, a thing that would do great 
damage to his many business interests. Twenty-four hours after the 
judgment Billy and Mimi were back in London, whooping it up at Crockford's, 
and sending out fancy invitation cards to what promised to be _the_ party of 
that strangely sweltering season. One of these cards found its way, with the 
assistance of Mr. S. S. Sisodia, to the residence of Alleluia Cone and Gibreel 
Farishta; another arrived, a little belatedly, at Saladin Chamcha's den, 
slipped under the door by the solicitous Jumpy. (Mimi had called Pamela to 
invite her, adding, with her usual directness: "Any notion where that 
husband of yours has gotten to?" -- Which Pamela answered, with English 
awkwardness, _yes er but_. Mimi got the whole story out of her in less than 
half an hour, which wasn't bad, and concluded triumphantly: "Sounds like 
your life is looking up, Pam. Bring "em both; bring anyone. It's going to be 
quite a circus.") 

The location for the party was another of Sisodia's inexplicable triumphs: the 
giant sound stage at the Shepperton film studios had been procured, 
apparently at no cost, and the guests would be able, therefore, to take their 
pleasures in the huge re-creation of Dickensian London that stood within. A 
musical adaptation of the great writer's last completed novel, renamed 
_Friend!_, with book and lyrics by the celebrated genius of the musical stage, 
Mr. Jeremy Bentham, had proved a mammoth hit in the West End and on 
Broadway, in spite of the macabre nature of some of its scenes; now, 
accordingly, _The Chums_, as it was known in the business, was receiving 
the accolade of a big— budget movie production. "The pipi PR people," 



Sisodia told Gibreel on the phone, "think that such a fufufuck, _function_, 
which is to be most ista ista istar ista ista istudded, will be good for their 
bibuild up cacampaign." 

The appointed night arrived: a night of dreadful heat. 

ooo 

Shepperton! -- Pamela and Jumpy are already here, borne on the wings of 
Pamela's MG, when Chamcha, having disdained their company, arrives in 
one of the fleet of coaches the evening's hosts have made available to those 
guests wishing for whatever reason to be driven rather than to drive. -- And 
someone else, too, -- the one with whom our Saladin fell to earth, -- has 
come; is wandering within. -- Chamcha enters the arena; and is amazed. -- 
Here London has been altered -- no, _condensed_, -- according to the 
imperatives of film. -- Why, here's the Stucconia of the Veneerings, those 
bran-new, spick and span new people, lying shockingly adjacent to Portman 
Square, and the shady angle containing various Podsnaps. -- And worse: 
behold the dustman's mounds of Boffin's Bower, supposedly in the near 
vicinity of Holloway, looming in this abridged metropolis over Fascination 
Fledgeby's rooms in the Albany, the West End's very heart! -- But the guests 
are not disposed to grumble; the reborn city, even rearranged, still takes the 
breath away; most particularly in that part of the immense studio through 
which the river winds, the river with its fogs and Gaffer Hexam's boat, the 
ebbing Thames flowing beneath two bridges, one of iron, one of stone. -- 
Upon its cobbled banks the guests' gay footsteps fall; and there sound 
mournful, misty, footfalls of ominous note. A dry ice pea-souper lifts across 
the set. 

Society grandees, fashion models, film stars, corporation bigwigs, a brace of 
minor royal Personages, useful politicians and suchlike riff-raff perspire and 
mingle in these counterfeit streets with numbers of men and women as 
sweat-glistened as the "real" guests and as counterfeit as the city: hired 
extras in period costume, as well as a selection of the movie's leading 
players. Chamcha, who realizes in the moment of sighting him that this 
encounter has been the whole purpose of his journey, -- which fact he has 
succeeded in keeping from himself until this instant, -- spots Gibreel in the 
increasingly riotous crowd. 

Yes: there, on London Bridge Which Is Of Stone, without a doubt, Gibreel! -- 
And that must be his Alleluia, his Icequeen Cone! -- What a distant 
expression he seems to be wearing, how he lists a few degrees to the left; 
and how she seems to dote on him -- how everyone adores him: for he is 
among the very greatest at the party, Battuta to his left, Sisodia at Allie's 
right, and all about a host of faces that would be recognized from Peru to 
Timbuctoo! -- Chamcha struggles through the crowd, which grows ever more 
dense as he nears the bridge; -- but he is resolved — Gibreel, he will reach 
Gibreel! — when with a clash of cymbals loud music strikes up, one of Mr. 
Bentham's immortal, showstopping tunes, and the crowd parts like the Red 



Sea before the children of Israel. -- Chamcha, off—balance, staggers back, is 
crushed by the parting crowd against a fake half-timbered edifice -- what 
else? -- a Curiosity Shop; and, to save himself, retreats within, while a great 
singing throng of bosomy ladies in mobcaps and frilly blouses, accompanied 
by an over-sufficiency of stovepipe-hatted gents, comes rollicking down the 
riverside street, singing for all they're worth. 
_What kind of fellow is Our Mutual Friend?_ 
_What does he intend?_ 

_Is he the kind of fellow on whom we may depend?_ 
_etc. etc. etc._ 

"It's a funny thing," a woman's voice says behind him, "but when we were 
doing the show at the C-- Theatre, there was an outbreak of lust among the 
cast; quite unparalleled, in my experience. People started missing their cues 
because of the shenanigans in the wings." 

The speaker, he observes, is young, small, buxom, far from unattractive, 
damp from the heat, flushed with wine, and evidently in the grip of the 
libidinous fever of which she speaks. -- The "room" has little light, but he 
can make out the glint in her eye. "We've got time," she continues matter-- 
of--factly. "After this lot finish there's Mr. Podsnap's solo." Whereupon, 
arranging herself in an expert parody of the Marine Insurance agent's 
selfimportant posture, she launches into her own version of the scheduled 
musical Podsnappery: 
_Ours is a Copious Language_, 
_A Language Trying to Strangers_; 
_Ours is the Favoured Nation_, 
_Blest, and Safe from Dangers_ . . . 

Now, in Rex-Harrisonian speech-song, she addresses an invisible Foreigner. 
"And How Do You Like London? — 'Aynormaymong rich?' -- Enormously Rich, 
we say. Our English adverbs do Not terminate in Mong. -- And Do You Find, 
Sir, Many Evidences of our British Constitution in the Streets of the World's 
Metropolis, London, Londres, London? -- I would say," she adds, still 
Podsnapping, "that there is in the Englishman a combination of qualities, a 
modesty, an independence, a responsibility, a repose, which one would seek 
in vain among the Nations of the Earth." 

The creature has been approaching Chamcha while delivering herself of 
these lines; -- unfastening, the while, her blouse; -- and he, mongoose to 
her cobra, stands there transfixed; while she, exposing a shapely right 
breast, and offering it to him, points out that she has drawn upon it, -- as an 
act of civic pride, -- the map of London, no less, in red magic-marker, with 
the river all in blue. The metropolis summons him; -- but he, giving an 
entirely Dickensian cry, pushes his way out of the Curiosity Shop into the 
madness of the street. 

Gibreel is looking directly at him from London Bridge; their eyes -- or so it 
seems to Chamcha — meet. Yes: Gibreel lifts, and waves, an unexcited arm. 



0 0 0 

What follows is tragedy. -- Or, at the least the echo of tragedy, the full- 
blooded original being unavailable to modern men and women, so it's said. - 
- A burlesque for our degraded, imitative times, in which clowns re-enact 
what was first done by heroes and by kings. -- Well, then, so be it. -- The 
question that's asked here remains as large as ever it was: which is, the 
nature of evil, how it's born, why it grows, how it takes unilateral possession 
of a many-sided human soul. Or, let's say: the enigma of Iago. 
It's not unknown for literary—theatrical exegetes, defeated by the character, 
to ascribe his actions to "motiveless malignity". Evil is evil and will do evil, 
and that's that; the serpent's poison is his very definition. -- Well, such 
shruggings-off will not pass muster here. My Chamcha may be no Ancient of 
Venice, my Allie no smothered Desdemona, Farishta no match for the Moor, 
but they will, at least, be costumed in such explanations as my 
understanding will allow. -- And so, now, Gibreel waves in greeting; 
Chamcha approaches; the curtain rises on a darkening stage. 

ooo 

Let's observe, first, how isolated this Saladin is; his only willing companion 
an inebriated and cartographically bosomed stranger, he struggles alone 
through that partying throng in which all persons appear to be (and are not) 
one another's friends; -- while there on London Bridge stands Farishta, beset 
by admirers, at the very centre of the crowd; 

and, next, let us appreciate the effect on Chamcha, who loved England in 
the form of his lost English wife, -- of the golden, pale and glacial presence 
by Farishta's side of Alleluia Cone; he snatches a glass from a passing 
waiter's tray, drinks the wine fast, takes another; and seems to see, in 
distant Allie, the entirety of his loss; 

and in other ways, as well, Gibreel is fast becoming the sum of Saladin's 
defeats; -- there with him now, at this very moment, is another traitor; 
mutton dressed as lamb, fifty plus and batting her eyelashes like an 
eighteen-year-old, is Chamcha's agent, the redoubtable Charlie Sellers; -- 
you wouldn't liken him to a Transylvanian bloodsucker, would you, Charlie, 
the irate watcher inwardly cries; -- and grabs another glass; — and sees, at 
its bottom, his own anonymity, the other's equal celebrity, and the great 
injustice of the division; 

most especially -- he bitterly reflects — because Gibreel, London's conqueror, 
can see no value in the world now falling at his feet! -- why, the bastard 
always sneered at the place, Proper London, Vilayet, the English, Spoono, 
what cold fish they are, I swear; -- Chamcha, moving inexorably towards 
him through the crowd, seems to see, _right now_, that same sneer upon 
Farishta's face, that scorn of an inverted Podsnap, for whom all things 
English are worthy of derision instead of praise; -- O God, the cruelty of it, 
that he, Saladin, whose goal and crusade it was to make this town his own, 
should have to see it kneeling before his contemptuous rival! -- so there is 



also this: that Chamcha longs to stand in Farishta's shoes, while his own 
footwear is of no interest whatsoever to Gibreel. 
What is unforgivable? 

Chamcha, looking upon Farishta's face for the first time since their rough 
parting in Rosa Diamond's hail, seeing the strange blankness in the other's 
eyes, recalls with overwhelming force the earlier blankness, Gibreel standing 
on the stairs and doing nothing while he, Chamcha, horned and captive, was 
dragged into the night; and feels the return of hatred, feels it filling him 
bottom--to--top with fresh green bile, _never mind about excuses_, it cries, 
_to hell with mitigations and what-could-he-have-dones; what's beyond 
forgiveness is beyond. You can't judge an internal injury by the size of the 
hole_. 

So: Gibreel Farishta, put on trial by Chamcha, gets a rougher ride than Mimi 
and Billy in New York, and is declared guilty, for all perpetuity, of the 
Inexcusable Thing. From which what follows, follows. -- But we may permit 
ourselves to speculate a while about the true nature of this Ultimate, this 
Inexpiable Offence. -- Is it really, can it be, simply his silence on Rosa's 
stairs? -- Or are there deeper resentments here, gripes for which this so- 
called Primary Cause is, in truth, no more than a substitute, a front? -- For 
are they not conjoined opposites, these two, each man the other's shadow? 
-- One seeking to be transformed into the foreignness he admires, the other 
preferring, contemptuously, to transform; one, a hapless fellow who seems 
to be continually punished for uncommitted crimes, the other, called angelic 
by one and all, the type of man who gets away with everything. -- We may 
describe Chamcha as being somewhat less than life--size; but loud, vulgar 
Gibreel is, without question, a good deal larger than life, a disparity which 
might easily inspire neo-Procrustean lusts in Chamcha: to stretch himself by 
cutting Farishta down to size. 
What is unforgivable? 

What if not the shivering nakedness of being _wholly known_ to a person 
one does not trust? -- And has not Gibreel seen Saladin Chamcha in 
circumstances -- hijack, fall, arrest -- in which the secrets of the self were 
utterly exposed? 

Well, then. -- Are we coming closer to it? Should we even say that these arc 
two fundamentally" different _types_ of self? Might we not agree that 
Gibreel, for all his stage—name and performances; and in spite of born-again 
slogans, new beginnings, metamorphoses; -- has wished to remain, to a 
large degree, _continuous_ — that is, joined to and arising from his past; -- 
that he chose neither near—fatal illness nor transmuting fall; that, in point of 
fact, he fears above all things the altered states in which his dreams leak 
into, and overwhelm, his waking self, making him that angelic Gibreel he has 
no desire to be; — so that his is still a self 



which, for our present purposes, we may describe as "true" . . . whereas 
Saladin Chamcha is a creature of _selected_ dis-- continuities, a _willing_ 
re--invention; his _preferred_ revolt against history being what makes him, 
in our chosen idiom, "false"? And might we then not go on to say that it is 
this falsity of self that makes possible in Chamcha a worse and deeper falsity 
-- call this "evil" -- and that this is the truth, the door, that was opened in 
him by his fall? -- While Gibreel, to follow the logic of our established 
terminology, is to be considered "good" by virtue of _wishing to remain_, for 
all his vicissitudes, at bottom an untranslated man. 
-- But, and again but: this sounds, does it not, dangerously like an 
intentionalist fallacy? -- Such distinctions, resting as they must on an idea of 
the self as being (ideally) homogeneous, non-hybrid, "pure", -- an utterly 
fantastic notion! -- cannot, must not, suffice. No! Let's rather say an even 
harder thing: that evil may not be as far beneath our surfaces as we like to 
say it is. -- That, in fact, we fall towards it _naturally_, that is, _not against 
our natures_. -- And that Saladin Chamcha set out to destroy Gibreel 
Farishta because, finally, it proved so easy to do; the true appeal of evil 
being the seductive ease with which one may embark upon that road. (And, 
let us add in conclusion, the later impossibility of return.) 
Saladin Chamcha, however, insists on a simpler line. "It was his treason at 
Rosa Diamond's house; his silence, nothing more." 

He sets foot upon the counterfeit London Bridge. From a nearby red-and- 
white-striped puppeteer's booth, Mr. Punch -- whacking Judy -- calls out to 
him: _That's the way to do it!_ After which Gibreel, too, speaks a greeting, 
the enthusiasm of the words undone by the incongruous listlessness of the 
voice: "Spoono, is it you. You bloody devil. There you are, big as life. Come 
here, you Salad baba, old Chumch." 

ooo 

This happened: 

The moment Saladin Chamcha got close enough to Allie Cone to be 
transfixed, and somewhat chilled, by her eyes, he felt his reborn animosity 
towards Gibreel extending itself to her, with her degree-zero go-to-hell look, 
her air of being privy to some great, secret mystery of the universe; also, 
her quality of what he would afterwards think of as _wilderness_, a hard, 
sparse thing, antisocial, self-contained, an essence. Why did it annoy him so 
much? Why, before she'd even opened her mouth, had he characterized her 
as part of the enemy? 

Perhaps because he desired her; and desired, even more, what he took to 
be that inner certainty of hers; lacking which, he envied it, and sought to 
damage what he envied. If love is a yearning to be like (even to become) 
the beloved, then hatred, it must be said, can be engendered by the same 
ambition, when it cannot be fulfilled. 

This happened: Chamcha invented an Allie, and became his fiction's 
antagonist. . . he showed none of this. He smiled, shook hands, was pleased 



to meet her; and embraced Gibreel. _I follow him to serve my turn upon 
him_. Allie, suspecting nothing, excused herself. The two of them must have 
so much to catch up on, she said; and, promising to return soon, departed: 
off, as she put it, to explore. He noticed that she hobbled slightly for a step 
or two; then paused, and strode off strongly. Among the things he did not 
know about her was her pain. 

Not knowing that the Gibreel standing before him, remote of eye and 
perfunctory in his greeting, was under the most attentive medical 
supervision; -- or that he was obliged to take, on a daily basis, certain drugs 
that dulled his senses, because of the very real possibility of a recurrence of 
his no--longer--nameless illness, that is to say, paranoid schizophrenia; -- or 
that he had long been kept away, at Allie's absolute insistence, from the 
movie people whom she had come strongly to distrust, ever since his last 
rampage; -- or that their presence at the Battuta--Mamoulian party was a 
thing to which she had been whole-heartedly opposed, acquiescing only after 
a terrible scene in which Gibreel had roared that he would be kept a prisoner 
no longer, and that he was determined to make a further effort to re—enter 
his "real life"; -- or that the effort of looking after a disturbed lover who was 
capable of seeing small bat-like imps hanging upside down in the refrigerator 
had worn Allie thin as a worn-out shirt, forcing upon her the roles of nurse, 
scapegoat and crutch — requiring her, in sum, to act against her own 
complex and troubled nature; -- not knowing any of this, failing to 
comprehend that the Gibreel at whom he was looking, and believed he saw, 
Gibreel the embodiment of all the good fortune that the Fury-haunted 
Chamcha so signally lacked, was as much the creature of his fany, as much 
a fiction, as his invented—resented Allie, that classic drop— dead blonde or 
femme fatale conjured up by his envious, tormented, Oresteian imagination, 
-- Saladin in his ignorance nevertheless penetrated, by the merest chance, 
the chink in Gibreel's (admittedly somewhat quixotic) armour, and 
understood how his hated Other might most swiftly be unmade. 
Gibreel's banal question made the opening. Limited by sedatives to small- 
talk, he asked vaguely: "And how, tell me, is your goodwife?" At which 
Chamcha, his tongue loosened by alcohol, blurted out: "How? Knocked up. 
Enceinte. Great with fucking child." Soporific Gibreel missed the violence in 
this speech, beamed absently, placed an arm around Saladin's shoulders. 
"Shabash, mubarak," he offered congratulations. "Spoono! Damn speedy 
work." 

"Congratulate her lover," Saladin thickly raged. "My old friend, Jumpy Joshi. 
Now there, I admit it, is a man. Women go wild, it seems. God knows why. 
They want his goddamn babies and they don't even wait to ask his leave." 
"For instance who?" Gibreel yelled, making heads turn and Chamcha recoil in 
surprise. "Who who who?" he hooted, causing tipsy giggles. Saladin 
Chamcha laughed, too: but without pleasure. "I'll tell you who for instance. 



My wife for instance, that's who. That is no lady, mister Farishta, Gibreel. 
Pamela, my nolady wife." 

At this very moment, as luck would have it, -- while Saladin in his cups was 
quite ignorant of the effect his words were having on Gibreel, -- for whom 
two images had explosively combined, the first being his sudden memory of 
Rekha Merchant on a flying carpet warning him of Allie's secret wish to have 
a baby without informing the father, _who asks the seed for permission to 
plant_, and the second being an envisioning of the body of the martial arts 
instructor conjoined in high— kicking carnality with the same Miss Alleluia 
Cone, -- the figure of Jumpy Joshi was seen crossing "Southwark Bridge" in 
a state of some agitation, -- hunting, in fact, for Pamela, from whom he had 
become separated during the same rush of singing Dickensians which had 
pushed Saladin towards the metropolitan breasts of the young woman in the 
Curiosity Shop. "Talk of the devil," Saladin pointed. "There the bastard 
goes." He turned towards Gibreel: but Gibreel had gone. Allie Cone 
reappeared, angry, frantic. "Where is he? Jesus! Can't I even leave him for a 
fucking _second?_ Couldn't you have kept your sodding _eyes_ on him?" 
"Why, what's the matter — ?" But now Allie had plunged into the crowd, so 
that when Chamcha saw Gibreel crossing "Southwark Bridge" she was out of 
earshot. -- And here was Pamela, demanding: "Have you seen Jumpy?" -- 
And he pointed, "That way," whereupon she, too, vanished without a word of 
courtesy; and now Jumpy was seen, crossing "Southwark Bridge" in the 
opposite direction, curly hair wilder than ever, coathanger shoulders 
hunched inside the greatcoat he had refused to remove, eyes searching, 
thumb homing in on mouth; -- and, a little later, Gibreel headed across the 
simulacrum of that bridge Which Is Of Iron, going the same way as Jumpy 
went. 

In short, events had begun to border on the farcical; but when, some 
minutes later, the actor playing the role of "Gaffer Hexam", who kept watch 
over that stretch of the Dickensian Thames for floating corpses, to relieve 
them of their valuables before handing them over to the police, -- came 
rowing rapidly down the studio river with his stipulated ragged, grizzled hair 
standing straight up on end, the farce was instantly terminated; for there in 
his disreputable boat lay the insensate body of Jumpy Joshi in his 
waterlogged greatcoat. "Knocked cold," the boatman cried, pointing to the 
huge lump rising up at the back of Jumpy's skull, "and being unconscious in 
the water it's a miracle he never drowned." 

ooo 

One week after that, in response to an impassioned telephone call from Allie 
Cone, who had tracked him down via Sisodia, Battuta and finally Mimi, and 
who appeared to have defrosted quite a bit, Saladin Chamcha found himself 
in the passenger seat of a three-year-old silver Citroen station wagon which 
the future Alicja Boniek had presented to her daughter before leaving for an 
extended Californian stay. Allie had met him at Carlisle station, repeating 



her earlier telephonic apologies -- "I'd no right to speak to you like that; you 
knew nothing, I mean about his, well, thank heavens nobody saw the attack, 
and it seems to have been hushed up, but that poor man, an oar on the 
head from behind, it's too bad; the point is, we've taken a place up north, 
friends of mine are away, it just seemed best to get out of range of human 
beings, and, well, he's been asking for you; you could really help him, I 
think, and to be frank I could do with the help myself," which left Saladin 
little the wiser but consumed by curiosity -- and now Scotland was rushing 
past the Citroen windows at alarming speed: an edge of Hadrian's Wall, the 
old elopers' haven Gretna Green, and then inland towards the Southern 
Uplands; Ecclefechan, Lockerbie, Beattock, Elvanfoot. Chamcha tended to 
think of all non-metropolitan locales as the deeps of interstellar space, and 
journeys into them as fraught with peril: for to break down in such 
emptiness would surely be to die alone and undiscovered. He had noted 
warily that one of the Citroen's headlamps was broken, that the fuel gauge 
was in the red (it turned out to be broken, too), the daylight was failing, and 
Allie was driving as if the A74 were the track at Silverstone on a sunny day. 
"He can't get far without transport, but you neverknow," she explained 
grimly. "Three days ago he stole the car keys and they found him heading 
the wrong way up an exit road on the Mo, shouting about damnation. 
_Prepare for the vengeance of the Lord_, he told the motorway cops, _for I 
shall soon summon my lieutenant, Azraeel_. They wrote it all down in their 
little books." Chamcha, his heart still filled with his own vengeful lusts, 
affected sympathy and shock. "And Jumpy?" he inquired. Allie took both 
hands off the wheel and spread them in an I-giveup gesture, while the car 
wobbled terrifyingly across the bendy road. "The doctors say the possessive 
jealousy could be part of the same thing; at least, it can set the madness off, 
like a fuse." 

She was glad of the chance to talk; and Chamcha lent her a willing ear. If 
she trusted him, it was because Gibreel did, too; he had no intention of 
damaging that trust. _Once he betrayed my trust; now let him, for a time, 
have confidence in me_. He was a tyro puppeteer; it was necessary to study 
the strings, to find out what was connected to what ... "I can't help it," Allie 
was saying. "I feel in some obscure way to blame for him. Our life isn't 
working out and it's my fault. My mother gets angry when I talk like this." 
Alicja, on the verge of catching the plane west, berated her daughter at 
Terminal Three. "I don't understand where you get these notions from," she 
cried amid backpackers, briefcases and weeping Asian mums. "You could say 
your father's life didn't go according to plan, either. So he should be blamed 
for the camps? Study history, Alleluia. In this century history stopped paying 
attention to the old psychological orientation of reality. I mean, these days, 
character isn't destiny any more. Economics is destiny. Ideology is destiny. 
Bombs are destiny. What does a famine, a gas chamber, a grenade care how 
you lived your life? 



Crisis comes, death comes, and your pathetic individual self doesn't have a 
thing to do with it, only to suffer the effects. This Gibreel of yours: maybe 
he's how history happens to you." She had returned, without warning, to the 
grand style of wardrobe preferred by Otto Cone, and, it seemed, to an 
oratorical manner that suited the big black hats and frilly suits. "Enjoy 
California, Mother," Allie said sharply. "One of us is happy," Alicja said. "Why 
shouldn't it be me?" And before her daughter could answer, she swept off 
past the passengers--only barrier, flourishing passport, boarding-pass, ticket, 
heading for the duty-free bottles of Opium and Gordon's Gin, which were on 
sale beneath an illuminated sign reading SAY HELLO TO THE GOOD BUYS. 
In the last light, the road rounded a spur of treeless, heather-covered hills. 
Long ago, in another country, another twilight, Chamcha had rounded 
another such spur and come into sight of the remains of Persepolis. Now, 
however, he was heading for a human ruin; not to admire, and maybe even 
(for the decision to do evil is never finally taken until the very instant of the 
deed; there is always a last chance to withdraw) to vandalize. To scrawl his 
name in Gibreel's flesh: _Saladin woz ear_. "Why stay with him?" he asked 
Allie, and to his surprise she blushed. "Why not spare yourself the pain?" 
"I don't really know you, not at all, really," she began, then paused and 
made a choice. "I'm not proud of the answer, but it's the truth," she said. 
"It's the sex. We're unbelievable together, perfect, like nothing I've known. 
Dream lovers. He just seems to, to _know_. To know _me_." She fell silent; 
the night hid her face. Chamcha's bitterness surged up again. Dream lovers 
were all around him; he, dreamless, could only watch. He gritted angry 
teeth; and bit, by mistake, his tongue. 

Gibreel and Allie had holed up in Durisdeer, a village so small it didn't have a 
pub, and were living in a deconsecrated Freekirk converted -- the quasi- 
religious term sounded strange to Chamcha -- by an architect friend of Allie's 
who had made a fortune out of such metamorphoses of the sacred into the 
profane. It struck Saladin as a gloomy sort of place, for all its white walls, 
recessed spotlights and wall-to-wall shag—pile carpeting. There were 
gravestones in the garden. As a retreat for a man suffering from paranoid 
delusions of being the chief archangel of God, Chamcha reflected, it wouldn't 
have been his own first choice. The Freekirk was set a little apart from the 
dozen or so other stone— and— tile houses that made up the community: 
isolated even within this isolation. Gibreel was standing at the door, a 
shadow against the illuminated hallway, when the car pulled up. "You got 
here," he shouted. "Yaar, too good. Welcome to bloody jail." 
The drugs made Gibreel clumsy. As the three of them sat around the pitch- 
pine kitchen table beneath the gentrified pulldown dimmer-switched lighting, 
he twice knocked over his coffee— cup (he was ostentatiously off booze; Allie, 
pouring two generous shots of Scotch, kept Chamcha company), and, 
cursing, stumbled about the kitchen for paper-towels to mop up the mess. 
"When I get sick of being this way Ijust cut down without telling her," he 



confessed. "And then the shit starts happening. I swear to you, Spoono, I 
can't bear the bloody idea that it will never stop, that the only choice is 
drugs or bugs in the brain. I can't bloody bear it. I swear, yaar, if I thought 
that was it, then, bas, I don't know, I"d, I don't know what." 
"Shut your face," Allie softly said. But he shouted out: "Spoono, I even hit 
her, do you know that? Bloody hell. One day I thought she was some 
rakshasa type of demon and Ijust went for her. Do you know how strong it is, 
the strength of madness?" 

"Fortunately for me I'd been going to -- oops, eek -- those selfdefence 
classes," Allie grinned. "He's exaggerating to save face. Actually he was the 
one who ended up banging his head on the floor." -- "Right here," Gibreel 
sheepishly assented. The kitchen floor was made of large flagstones. 
"Painful," Chamcha hazarded. "Damn right," Gibreel roared, strangely 
cheerful now. "Knocked me bilkul cold." 

The Freekirk's interior had been divided into a large twostorey (in estate 
agent's jargon, "double volume") reception-room -- the former hall of 
congregation -- and a more conventional half, with kitchen and utilities 
downstairs and bedrooms and bathroom above. Unable for some reason to 
sleep, Chamcha wandered at midnight into the great (and cold: the 
heatwave might be continuing in the south of England, but there wasn't a 
ripple of it up here, where the climate was autumnal and chill) living-room, 
and wandered among the ghost-voices of banished preachers while Gibreel 
and Allie made high-volume love. _Like Pamela_. He tried to think of Mishal, 
of Zeeny Vakil, but it didn't work. Stuffing his fingers in his ears, he fought 
against the sound effects of the copulation of Farishta and Alleluia Cone. 
Theirs had been a high-risk conjoining from the start, he reflected: first, 
Gibreel's dramatic abandonment of career and rush across the earth, and 
now, Allie's uncompromising determination to _see it through_, to defeat in 
him this mad, angelic divinity and restore the humanity she loved. No 
compromises for them; they were going for broke. Whereas he, Saladin, had 
declared himself content to live under the same roof as his wife and her 
lover boy. Which was the better way? Captain Ahab drowned, he reminded 
himself; it was the trimmer, Ishmael, who survived, 
ooo 

In the morning Gibreel ordered an ascent of the local "Top". But Allie 
declined, although it was plain to Chamcha that her return to the 
countryside had caused her to glow with joy. "Bloody flatfoot mame," 
Gibreel cursed her lovingly. "Come on, Salad. Us damn city slickers can show 
the Everest conqueror how to climb. What a bloody upside-down life, yaar. 
We go mountain-climbing while she sits here and makes business calls." 
Saladin's thoughts were racing: he understood, now, that strange hobble at 
Shepperton; understood, too, that this secluded haven would have to be 
temporary -- that Allie, by coming here, was sacrificing her own life, and 
wouldn't be able to go on doing so indefinitely. What should he do? Anything? 



Nothing? -- If revenge was to be taken, when and how? "Get these boots 
on," Gibreel commanded. "You think the rain will hold off all fucking day?" 
It didn't. By the time they reached the stone cairn at the summit of Gibreel's 
chosen climb, they were enveloped in a fine drizzle. "Damn good show," 
Gibreel panted. "Look: there she is, down there, sitting back like the Grand 
Panjandrum." He pointed down at the Freekirk. Chamcha, his heart pounding, 
was feeling foolish. He must start behaving like a man with a ticker problem. 
Where was the glory in dying of heart failure on this nothing of a Top, for 
nothing, in the rain? Then Gibreel got out his fieldglasses and started 
scanning the valley. There were hardly any moving figures to be seen -- two 
or three men and dogs, some sheep, no more. Gibreel tracked the men with 
his binoculars. "Now that we're alone," he suddenly said, "I can tell you why 
we really came away to this damn empty hole. It's because of her. Yes, yes; 
don't be fooled by my act! It's all her bloody beauty. Men, Spoono: they 
chase her like goddamn flies. I swear! I see them, slobbering and grabbing. 
It isn't right. She is a very private person, the most private person in the 
world. We have to protect her from lust." 

This speech took Saladin by surprise. You poor bastard, he thought, you 
really are going off your wretched head at a rate of knots. And, hard on the 
heels of this thought, a second sentence appeared, as if by magic, in his 
head: _Don't imagine that means I'll let you off_. 

ooo 

On the drive back to the Carlisle railway station, Chamcha mentioned the 
depopulation of the countryside. "There's no work," Allie said. "So it's empty. 
Gibreel says he can't get used to the idea that all this space indicates 
poverty: says it looks like luxury to him, after India's crowds." -- "And your 
work?" Chamcha asked. "What about that?" She smiled at him, the ice-- 
maiden facade long gone. "You're a nice man to ask. I keep thinking, one 
day it'll be my life in the middle, taking first place. Or, well, although I find it 
hard to use the first person plural: our life. That sounds better, right?" 
"Don't let him cut you off," Saladin advised. "From Jumpy, from your own 
worlds, whatever." This was the moment at which his campaign could truly 
be said to have begun; when he set a foot upon that effortless, seductive 
road on which there was only one way to go. "You're right," Allie was saying. 
"God, if he only knew. His precious Sisodia, for example: it's not just 
sevenfoot starlets he goes for, though he sure as hell likes those." -- "He 
made a pass," Chamcha guessed; and, simultaneously, filed the information 
away for possible later use. "He's totally shameless," Allie laughed. "It was 
right under Gibreel's nose. He doesn't mind rejection, though: he just bows, 
and murmurs _no offoffoffence_, and that's that. Can you imagine if I told 
Gibreel?" 

Chamcha at the railway station wished Allie luck. "We'll have to be in London 
for a couple of weeks," she said through the car window. "I've got meetings. 



Maybe you and Gibreel can get together then; this has really done him 
good." 

"Call any time," he waved goodbye, and watched the Citroen until it was out 
of sight. 

ooo 

That Allie Cone, the third point of a triangle of fictions -- for had not Gibreel 
and Allie come together very largely by imagining, out of their own needs, 
an "Allie" and a "Gibreel" with whom each could fall in love; and was not 
Chamcha now imposing on them the requirements of his own troubled and 
disappointed heart? -- was to be the unwitting, innocent agent of Chamcha's 
revenge, became even plainer to the plotter, Saladin, when he found that 
Gibreel, with whom he had arranged to spend an equatorial London 
afternoon, wanted nothing so much as to describe in embarrassing detail the 
carnal ecstasy of sharing Allie's bed. What manner of people were these, 
Saladin wondered with distaste, who enjoyed inflicting their intimacies on 
non-participating others? As Gibreel (with something like relish) described 
positions, love— bites, the secret vocabularies of desire, they strolled in 
Brickhall Fields among schoolgirls and roller-- skating infants and fathers 
throwing boomerangs and frisbees incompetently at scornful sons, and 
picked their way through broiling horizontal secretarial flesh; and Gibreel 
interrupted his erotic rhapsody to mention, madly, that "I sometimes look at 
these pink people and instead of skin, Spoono, what I see is rotting meat; I 
smell their putrefaction here," he tapped his nostrils fervently, as if revealing 
a mystery, "in my _nose_." Then once again to Allie's inner thighs, her 
cloudy eyes, the perfect valley of her lower back, the little cries she liked to 
make. This was a man in imminent danger of coming apart at the seams. 
The wild energy, the manic particularity of his descriptions suggested to 
Chamcha that he'd been cutting down on his dosages again, that he was 
rolling upwards towards the crest of a deranged high, that condition of 
febrile excitement that was like blind drunkenness in one respect (according 
to Allie), namely that Gibreel could remember nothing of what he said or did 
when, as was inevitable, he came down to earth. -- On and on went the 
descriptions, the unusual length of her nipples, her dislike of having her 
navel interfered with, the sensitivity of her toes. Chamcha told himself that, 
madness or no madness, what all this sex-talk revealed (because there had 
been Allie in the Citroen too) was the _weakness_ of their so-called "grand 
passion" -- a term which Allie had only half-jokingly employed -- because, in 
a phrase, there was nothing else about it that was any good; there was 
simply no other aspect of their togetherness to rhapsodize about. -- At the 
same time, however, he felt himself becoming aroused. He began to see 
himself standing outside her window, while she stood there naked like an 
actress on a screen, and a man's hands caressed her in a thousand ways, 
bringing her closer and closer to ecstasy; he came to see himself as that pair 
of hands, he could almost feel her coolness, her responses, almost hear her 



cries. -- He controlled himself. His desire disgusted him. She was 
unattainable; this was pure voyeurism, and he would not succumb to it. -- 
But the desire Gibreel's revelations had aroused would not go away. 
Gibreel's sexual obsession, Chamcha reminded himself, actually made things 
easier. "She's certainly a very attractive woman," he murmured by way of 
an experiment, and was gratified to receive a furious, strung-out glare in 
return. After which Gibreel, making a show of controlling himself, put his 
arm around Saladin and boomed: "Apologies, Spoono, I'm a bad-tempered 
bugger where she's concerned. But you and me! We're bhaibhai! Been 
through the worst and come out smiling; come on now, enough of this little 
nowhere park. Let's hit town." 

There is the moment before evil; then the moment of; then the time after, 
when the step has been taken, and each subsequent stride becomes 
progressively easier. "Fine with me," Chamcha replied. "It's good to see you 
looking so well." 

A boy of six or seven cycled past them on a BMX bike. Chamcha, turning his 
head to follow the boy's progress, saw that he was moving smoothly away 
down an avenue of overarching trees, through which the hot sunlight 
managed here and there to drip. The shock of discovering the location of his 
dream disoriented Chamcha briefly, and left him with a bad taste in his 
mouth: the sour flavour of might-have-beens. Gibreel hailed a taxi; and 
requested Trafalgar Square. 

O, he was in a high good humour that day, rubbishing London and the 
English with much of his old brio. Where Chamcha saw attractively faded 
grandeur, Gibreel saw a wreck, a Crusoe-city, marooned on the island of its 
past, and trying, with the help of a Man-Friday underclass, to keep up 
appearances. Under the gaze of stone lions he chased pigeons, shouting: "I 
swear, Spoono, back home these fatties wouldn't last one day; let's take one 
home for dinner." Chamcha's Englished soul cringed for shame. Later, in 
Covent Garden, he described for Gibreel's benefit the day the old fruit and 
vegetable market moved to Nine Elms. The authorities, worried about rats, 
had sealed the sewers and killed tens of thousands; but hundreds more 
survived. "That day, starving rats swarmed out on to the pavements," he 
recalled. "All the way down the Strand and over Waterloo Bridge, in and out 
of the shops, desperate for food." Gibreel snorted. "Now I know this is a 
sinking ship," he cried, and Chamcha felt furious at having given him the 
opening. "Even the bloody rats are off." And, after a pause: "What they 
needed was a pied piper, no? Leading them to destruction with a tune." 
When he wasn't insulting the English or describing Allie's body from the 
roots of her hair to the soft triangle of "the loveplace, the goddamn yoni," he 
seemed to wish to make lists: what were Spoono's ten favourite books, he 
wanted to know; also movies, female film stars, food. Chamcha offered 
conventional cosmopolitan answers. His movie--list included _Potemkin_, 
_Kane_, _Otto e Mezzo_, _The Seven SamuraL, _Alphaville_, _EI Angel 



Exterm inador_. "You've been brainwashed," Gibreel scoffed. "All this 
Western art-house crap." His top ten of everything came from "back home", 
and was aggressively lowbrow. _Mother India_, _Mr. India_, _Shree 
Charsawbees_: no Ray, no Mrinal Sen, no Aravindan or Ghatak. "Your head's 
so full of junk," he advised Saladin, "you forgot everything worth knowing." 
His mounting excitement, his babbling determination to turn the world into a 
cluster of hit parades, his fierce walking pace -- they must have walked 
twenty miles by the end of their travels -- suggested to Chamcha that it 
wouldn't take much, now, to push him over the edge. _It seems I turned out 
to be a confidence man, too, Mimi. The art of the assassin is to draw the 
victim close; makes him easier to knjfe_. "I'm getting hungry," Gibreel 
imperiously announced. "Take me to one of your top-ten eateries." 
In the taxicab, Gibreel needled Chamcha, who had not informed him of the 
destination. "Some Frenchy joint, na? Or Japanese, with raw fishes and 
octopuses. God, why I trust your taste." 
They arrived at the Shaandaar Cafe. 

ooo 

Jumpy wasn't there. Nor, apparently, had Mishal Sufyan patched things up 
with her mother; Mishal and Hanif were absent, and neither Anahita nor her 
mother gave Chamcha a greeting that could be described as warm. Only Haji 
Sufyan was welcoming: "Come, come, sit; you're looking good." The cafe 
was oddly empty, and even Gibreel's presence failed to create much of a stir. 
It took Chamcha a few seconds to understand what was up; then he saw the 
quartet of white youths sitting at a corner table, spoiling for a fight. 
The young Bengali waiter (whom Hind had been obliged to employ after her 
elder daughter's departure) came over and took their order -- aubergmes, 
sikh kababs, rice -- while staring angrily in the direction of the troublesome 
quartet, who were, as Saladin now perceived, very drunk indeed. The waiter, 
Amin, was as annoyed with Sufyan as the drunks. "Should never have let 
them sit," he mumbled to Chamcha and Gibreel. "Now I'm obliged to serve. 
It's okay for the seth; he's not the front line, see." 

The drunks got their food at the same time as Chamcha and Gibreel. When 
they started complaining about the cooking, the atmosphere in the room 
grew even more highly charged. Finally they stood up. "We're not eating this 
shit, you cunts," yelled the leader, a tiny, runty fellow with sandy hair, a 
pale thin face, and spots. "It's shit. You can go fuck yourselves, fucking 
cunts." His three companions, giggling and swearing, left the cafe. The 
leader lingered for a moment. "Enjoying your food?" he screamed at 
Chamcha and Gibreel. "It's fucking shit. Is that what you eat at home, is it? 
Cunts." Gibreel was wearing an expression that said, loud and clear: so this 
is what the British, that great nation of conquerors, have become in the end. 
He did not respond. The little rat--faced speaker came over. "I asked you a 
fucking question," he said. "I said. Are you fucking enjoying your fucking 
_shit dinner?_" And Saladin Chamcha, perhaps out of his annoyance that 



Gibreel had not been confronted by the man he'd all but killed -- catching 
him off guard from behind, the coward's way -- found himself answering: 
"We would be, if it wasn't for you." Ratboy, swaying on his feet, digested 
this information; and then did a very surprising thing. Taking a deep breath, 
he drew himself up to his full five foot five; then leaned forward, and spat 
violently and copiously all over the food. 

"Baba, if that's in your top ten," Gibreel said in the taxi home, "don't take 
me to the places you don't like so much." '"Minnamin, Gut mag alkan, Pern 
dirstan,'" Chamcha replied. "It means, 'My darling, God makes hungry, the 
Devil thirsty.' Nabokov." 

"Him again," Gibreel complained. "What bloody language?" 

"He made it up. It's what Kinbote's Zemblan nurse tells him as a child. In 

_Pale Fire_." 

"_Perndirstan_," Farishta repeated. "Sounds like a country: Hell, maybe. I 
give up, anyway. How are you supposed to read a man who writes in a 
made-up lingo of his own?" 

They were almost back at Allie's flat overlooking Brickhall Fields. "The 
playwright Strindberg," Chamcha said, absently, as if following some 
profound train of thought, "after two unhappy marriages, wedded a famous 
and lovely twenty-year-old actress called Harriet Bosse. In the _Dream_ 
she was a great Puck. He wrote for her, too: the part of Eleanora in _Easter_. 
An 'angel of peace'. The young men went crazy for her, and Strindberg, well, 
he got so jealous he almost lost his mind. He tried to keep her locked up at 
home, far from the eyes of men. She wanted to travel; he brought her travel 
books. It was like the old Cliff Richard song: _Gonna lock her up in a 
trunk/so no big hunk/can steal her away from me_." 
Farishta's heavy head nodded in recognition. He had fallen into a kind of 
reverie. "What happened?" he inquired as they reached their destination. 
"She left him," Chamcha innocently declared. "She said she could not 
reconcile him with the human race." 
ooo 

Alleluia Cone read, as she walked home from the Tube, her mother's 
deliriously happy letter from Stanford, Calif. "If people tell you happiness is 
unattainable," Alicja wrote in large, looping, back-leaning, left-handed letters, 
"kindly point them in my direction. I'll put them straight. I found it twice, the 
first time with your father, as you know, the second with this kind, broad 
man whose face is the exact colour of the oranges that grow all over these 
parts. Contentment, Allie. It beats excitement. Try it, you'll like it." When 
she looked up, Allie saw Maurice Wilson's ghost sitting atop a large copper 
beech-tree in his usual woollen attire -- tam--o"--shanter, diamond—pattern 
Pringle jersey, plus-- fours -- looking uncomfortably overdressed in the heat. 
"I've no time for you now," she told him, and he shrugged. _I can wait_. Her 
feet were bad again. She set her jaw and marched on. 



Saladin Chamcha, concealed behind the very copper beech from which 
Maurice Wilson's ghost was surveying Allie's painful progress, observed 
Gibreel Farishta bursting out of the front door of the block of flats in which 
he'd been waiting impatiently for her return; observed him red-eyed and 
raving. The demons of jealousy were sitting on his shoulders, and he was 
screaming out the same old song, wherethehell whothe whatthe dont 
thinkyoucanpullthewool howdareyou bitchbitchbitch. It appeared that 
Strindberg had succeeded where Jumpy (because absent) had failed. 
The watcher in the upper branches dematerialized; the other, with a 
satisfied nod, strolled away down an avenue of shady, spreading trees. 

ooo 

The telephone calls which now began to be received, first at their London 
residence and subsequently at a remote address in Dumfries and Galloway, 
by both Allie and Gibreel, were not too frequent; then again, they could not 
be termed infrequent. Nor were there too many voices to be plausible; then 

again, there were quite enough. These were not brief calls, such as those 
made by heavy breathers and other abusers of the telephone network, but, 
conversely, they never lasted long enough for the police, eavesdropping, to 

track them to their source. Nor did the whole unsavoury episode last very 
long — a mere matter of three and a half weeks, after which the callers 

desisted forever; but it might also be mentioned that it went on exactly as 
long as it needed to, that is, until it had driven Gibreel Farishta to do to Allie 

Cone what he had previously done to Saladin -- namely, the Unforgivable 

Thing. 

It should be said that nobody, not Allie, not Gibreel, not even the 
professional phone-tappers they brought in, ever suspected the calls of 
being a single man's work; but for Saladin Chamcha, once renowned (if only 
in somewhat specialist circles) as the Man of a Thousand Voices, such a 
deception was a simple matter, entirely lacking in effort or risk. In all, he 
was obliged to select (from his thousand voices and a voice) a total of no 
more than thirty—nine. 

When Allie answered, she heard unknown men murmuring intimate secrets 
in her ear, strangers who seemed to know her body's most remote recesses, 
faceless beings who gave evidence of having learned, by experience, her 
choicest preferences among the myriad forms of love; and once the 
attempts at tracing the calls had begun her humiliation grew, because now 
she was unable simply to replace the receiver, but had to stand and listen, 
hot in the face and cold along the spine, making attempts (which didn't work) 
actually to prolong the calls. 

Gibreel also got his share of voices: superb Byronic aristocrats boasting of 
having "conquered Everest", sneering guttersnipes, unctuous best-friend 
voices mingling warning and mockcommiseration, _a word to the wise, how 
stupid can you, don't you know yet what she's, anything in trousers, you 
poor moron, take it from a pal_. But one voice stood out from the rest, the 



high soulful voice of a poet, one of the first voices Gibreel heard and the one 
that got deepest under his skin; a voice that spoke exclusively in rhyme, 
reciting doggerel verses of an understated naivety, even innocence, which 
contrasted so greatly with the masturbatory coarseness of most of the other 
callers that Gibreel soon came to think of it as the most insidiously menacing 
of all. 

_I like coffee, I like tea_, 

_I like things you do with me_. 

_Tell her that_, the voice swooned, and rang off. Another day it returned 

with another jingle: 

_I like butter, I like toast_, 

_You're the one I love the most_. 

_Give her that message, too; if you'd be so kind_. There was something 

demonic, Gibreel decided, something profoundly immoral about cloaking 

corruption in this greetings—card tum--ti-tum. 

_Rosy apple, lemon tart_, _Here's the name of my sweetheart_. 

A ... I ... I ... Gibreel, in disgust and fear, banged down the receiver; and 

trembled. After that the versifier stopped calling for a while; but his was the 

voice Gibreel started waiting for, dreading its reappearance, having perhaps 

accepted, at some level deeper than consciousness, that this infernal, 

childlike evil was what would finish him off for good. 

ooo 

But O how easy it all turned out to be! How comfortably evil lodged in those 
supple, infinitely flexible vocal cords, those puppetmaster's strings! How 
surely it stepped out along the high wires of the telephone system, poised as 
a barefoot acrobat; how confidently it entered the victims' presence, as 
certain of its effect as a handsome man in a perfectly tailored suit! And how 
carefully it bided its time, sending forth every voice but the voice that would 
deliver the coup de grace -- for Saladin, too, had understood the doggerel's 
special potency -- deep voices and squeaky voices, slow ones, quick ones, 
sad and cheerful, aggression—laden and shy. One by one, they dripped into 
Gibreel's ears, weakening his hold on the real world, drawing him little by 
little into their deceitful web, so that little by little their obscene, invented 
women began to coat the real woman like a viscous, green film, and in spite 
of his protestations to the contrary he started slipping away from her; and 
then it was time for the return of the little, satanic verses that made him 
mad. 

ooo 

_Roses are red, violets are blue_, 
_Sugar never tasted sweet as you_. 

_Pass it on_. He returned as innocent as ever, giving birth to a turmoil of 
butterflies in Gibreel's knotting stomach. After that the rhymes came thick 
and fast. They could have the smuttiness of the school playground: 
_When she's down at Waterloo She don't wear no yes she do_ 



_When she's up at Leicester Square_ 

_She don't wear no underwear_; 

or, once or twice, the rhythm of a cheerleader's chant. 

_Knickerknacker, firecracker_, 

_Sis! Boom! Bah!_ 

_Alleluia! Alleluia!_ 

_Rah! Rah! Rah!_ 

And lastly, when they had returned to London, and Allie was absent at the 
ceremonial opening of a freezer food mart in Hounslow, the last rhyme. 
_Violets are blue, roses are red_, 
_I've got her right here in my bed_. 
_Goodbye, sucker_. 
Dialling tone. 

ooo 

Alleluia Cone returned to find Gibreel gone, and in the vandalized silence of 
her apartment she determined that this time she would not have him back, 
no matter in what sorry condition or how wheedlingly he came crawling to 
her, pleading for forgiveness and for love; because before he left he had 
wrought a terrible vengeance upon her, destroying every one of the 
surrogate Himalayas she had collected over the years, thawing the 
iceEverest she kept in her freezer, pulling down and ripping to shreds the 
parachute-silk peaks that rose above her bed, and hacking to pieces (he'd 
used the small axe she kept with the fire extinguisher in the broom cupboard) 
the priceless whittled memento of her conquest of Chomolungma, given her 
by Pemba the sherpa, as a warning as well as a commemoration. _To AN Bibi. 
We u"ere luck. Not to try again_. 

She flung open sash windows and screamed abuse at the innocent Fields 
beneath. "Die slowly! Burn in hell!" 

Then, weeping, she rang Saladin Chamcha to tell him the bad news. 

ooo 

Mr. John Maslama, owner of the Hot Wax nightclub, the record chain of the 
same name, and of "Fair Winds", the legendary store where you could get 
yourself the finest horns -- clarinets, saxophones, trombones -- that a 
person could find to blow in the whole of London town, was a busy man, so 
he would always ascribe to the intervention of Divine Providence the happy 
chance that caused him to be present in the trumpet store when the 
Archangel of God walked in with thunder and lightning sitting like laurels 
upon his noble brow. Being a practical businessman, Mr. Maslama had up to 
this point concealed from his employees his extracurricular work as the chief 
herald of the returned Celestial and Semi-Godlike Being, sticking posters in 
his shopwindows only when he was sure he was unobserved, neglecting to 
sign the display advertisements he bought in newspapers and magazines at 
considerable personal expense, proclaiming the imminent Glory of the 
Coming of the Lord. He issued press releases through a public relations 



subsidiary of the Valance agency, asking that his own anonymity be guarded 
carefully. "Our client is in a position to state," these releases -- which 
enjoyed, for a time, an amused vogue among Fleet Street diarists -- 
cryptically announced, "that his eyes have seen the Glory referred to above. 
Gibreel is among us at this moment, somewhere in the inner city of London - 

- probably in Camden, Brickhall, Tower Hamlets or Hackney -- and he will 
reveal himself soon, perhaps within days or weeks." -- All of this was 
obscure to the three tall, languid, male attendants in the Fair Winds store 
(Maslama refused to employ women sales assistants here; "my motto," he 
was fond of saying, "is that nobody trusts a female to help him with his 
horn"); which was why none of them could believe their eyes when their 
hard-nosed employer suddenly underwent a complete change of personality, 
and rushed over to this wild, unshaven stranger as if he were God Almighty - 

- with his two-tone patent leather shoes, Armani suit and slicked down 
Robert de Niro hair above proliferating eyebrows, Maslama didn't look the 
crawling type, but that's what he was _doing_, all right, onhis goddamn 
_belly_, pushing his staff aside, _I'II attend to the gentleman myself_, 
bowing and scraping, walking backwards, would you believe? -- Anyway, the 
stranger had this _fat money-belt_ under his shirt and started hauling out 
numbers of high-denomination notes; he pointed at a trumpet on a high 
shelf, _that's the one_, just like that, hardly looked at it, and Mr. Maslama 
was up the ladder _pronto_, I " 1 1 — get— it— I— said— I " 1 1 — get— it, and now the 
truly amazing part, he tried to refuse payment, Maslama!, it was no no _sir_ 
no charge _sir_, but the stranger paid anyway, stuffing the notes into 
Maslama's upper jacket-pocket as if he were some sort of _bellhop_, you 
had to be there, and last of all the customer turns to the whole store and 
yells at the top of his voice, _I am the right hand of God_. -- Straight up, 
you wouldn't credit it, the bloody day of judgment was at hand. — Maslama 
was right out of it after that, well shaken he was, he actually fell to his 
actual knees. -- Then the stranger held the trumpet up over his head and 
shouted _I name this trumpet Azraeel, the Last Trump, the Exterminator of 
Men!_ -- and we just stood there, I tell you, turned to stone, because all 
around the fucking insane, _certifiable_ bastard's head there was this bright 
glow, you know?, streaming out, like, from a point behind his head. 

A halo. 

_Say what you like_, the three shop-attendants afterwards repeated to 
anyone who would listen, _say what you like, but we saw what we saw_. 
3 

The death of Dr. Uhuru Simba, formerly Sylvester Roberts, while in custody 
awaiting trial, was described by the Brickhall constabulary's community 
liaison officer, a certain Inspector Stephen Kinch, as "a million--to--one 
shot". It appeared that Dr. Simba had been experiencing a nightmare so 
terrifying that it had caused him to scream piercingly in his sleep, attracting 
the immediate attention of the two duty officers. These gentlemen, rushing 



to his cell, arrived in time to see the still-- sleeping form of the gigantic man 
literally lift off its bunk under the malign influence of the dream and plunge 
to the floor. A loud, snap was heard by both officers; it was the sound of Dr. 
Uhuru Simba's neck breaking. Death had been instantaneous. The dead 
man's minuscule mother, Antoinette Roberts, standing in a heap black hat 
and dress on the back of her younger son's pick-up truck, the veil of 
mourning pushed defiantly back off her face, was not slow to seize upon 
Inspector Kinch's words and hurl them back into his florid, loose-chinned, 
impotent face, whose hangdog expression bore witness to the humiliation of 
being referred to by his brother officers as _niggerjimmy_ and, worse, 
_mushroom_, meaning that he was kept permanently in the dark, and from 
time to time -- for example in the present regrettable circumstances -- 
people threw shit all over him. "I want you to understand," Mrs. Roberts 
declaimed to the sizeable crowd that had gathered angrily outside the High 
Street police station, "that these people are gambling with our lives. They 
are laying odds on our chances of survival. I want you all to consider what 
that means in terms of their respect for us as human beings." And Hanif 
Johnson, as Uhuru Simba's solicitor, added his own clarification from Walcott 
Roberts's pick-up truck, pointing out that his client's alleged fatal plunge had 
been from the lower of the two bunks in his cell; that in an age of extreme 
overcrowding in the country's lock--ups it was unusual, to say the least, that 
the other bunk should have been unoccupied, ensuring that there were no 
witnesses to the death except for prison officers; and that a nightmare was 
by no means the only possible explanation for the screams of a black man in 
the hands of the custodial authorities. In his concluding remarks, afterwards 
termed "inflammatory and unprofessional" by Inspector Kinch, Hanif linked 
the community liaison officer's words to those of the notorious racist John 
Kingsley Read, who had once responded to news of a black man's death with 
the slogan, "One down; one million to go." The crowd murmured and 
bubbled; it was a hot and malicious day. "Stay hot," Simba's brother Walcott 
cried out to the assembly. "Don't anybody cool off. Maintain your rage." 
As Simba had in effect already been tried and convicted in what he had once 
called the "rainbow press -- red as rags, yellow as streaks, blue as movies, 
green as slime", his end struck many white people as rough justice, a 
murderous monster's retributive fall. But in another court, silent and black, 
he had received an entirely more favourable judgment, and these differing 
estimations of the deceased moved, in the aftermath of his death, on to the 
city streets, and fermented in the unending tropical heat. The "rainbow 
press" was full of Simba's support for Qazhafi, Khomeini, Louis Farrakhan; 
while in the streets of Brickhall, young men and women maintained, and 
fanned, the slow flame of their anger, a shadow-flame, but one capable of 
blotting out the light. 



Two nights later, behind the Charringtons Brewery in Tower Hamlets, the 
"Granny Ripper" struck again. And the night after that, an old woman was 
murdered near the adventure playground in Victoria Park, Hackney; once 
again, the Ripper's hideous "signature" — the ritual arrangement of the 
internal organs around the victim's body, whose precise configuration had 
never been made public -- had been added to the crime. When Inspector 
Kinch, looking somewhat ragged at the edges, appeared on television to 
propound the extraordinary theory that a "copycat killer" had somehow 
discovered the trademark which had been so carefully concealed for so long, 
and had therefore taken up the mantle which the late Uhuru Simba had let 
drop, -- then the Commissioner of Police also deemed it wise, as a 
precautionary measure, to quadruple the police presence on the streets of 
Brickhall, and to hold such large numbers of police in reserve that it proved 
necessary to cancel the capital's football programme for the weekend. And, 
in truth, tempers were fraying all over Uhuru Simba's old patch; Hanif 
Johnson issued a statement to the effect that the increased police presence 
was "provocative and incendiary", and at the Shaandaar and the Pagal 
Khana there began to assemble groups of young blacks and Asians 
determined to confront the cruising panda cars. At the Hot Wax, the effigy 
chosen for _meltdown_ was none other than the perspiring and already 
deliquescent figure of the community liaison officer. And the temperature 
continued, inexorably, to rise. 

Violent incidents began to occur more frequently: attacks on black families 
on council estates, harassment of black schoolchildren on their way home, 
brawls in pubs. At the Pagal Khana a rat-faced youth and three of his cronies 
spat over many people's food; as a result of the ensuing affray three Bengali 
waiters were charged with assault and the causing of actual bodily harm; the 
expectorating quartet was not, however, detained. Stories of police brutality, 
of black youths hauled swiftly into unmarked cars and vans belonging to the 
special patrol groups and flung out, equally discreetly, covered in cuts and 
bruises, spread throughout the communities. Self-defence patrols of young 
Sikh, Bengali and Afro-Caribbean males -- described by their political 
opponents as _vigilante groups_ -- began to roam the borough, on foot and 
in old Ford Zodiacs and Cortinas, determined not to "take it lying down". 
Hanif Johnson told his live-in lover, Mishal Sufyan, that in his opinion one 
more Ripper killing would light the fuse. "That killer's not just crowing about 
being free," he said. "He's laughing about Simba's death as well, and that's 
what the people can't stomach." 



Down these simmering streets, one unseasonally humid night, came Gibreel 

Farishta, blowing his golden horn. 

ooo 

At eight o"clock that evening, a Saturday, Pamela Chamcha stood with 
Jumpy Joshi -- who had refused to let her go unaccompanied -- next to the 
Photo-Me machine in a corner of the main concourse of Euston station, 
feeling ridiculously conspiratorial. At eight-fifteen she was approached by a 
wiry young man who seemed taller than she remembered him; following him 
without a word, she and Jumpy got into his battered blue pick-up truck and 
were driven to a tiny flat above an off-licence in Railton Road, Brixton, 
where Walcott Roberts introduced them to his mother, Antoinette. The three 
men whom Pamela afterwards thought of as Haitians for what she 
recognized to be stereotypical reasons were not introduced. "Have a glass of 
ginger wine," Antoinette Roberts commanded. "Good for the baby, too." 
When Walcott had done the honours Mrs. Roberts, looking lost in a 
voluminous and threadbare armchair (her surprisingly pale legs, matchstick- 
-thin, emerging from beneath her black dress to end in mutinous, pink 
ankle—socks and sensible lace--ups, failed by some distance to reach the 
floor), got to business. "These gentlemen were colleagues of my boy," she 
said. "It turns out that the probable reason for his murder was the work he 
was doing on a subject which I am told is also of interest to you. We believe 
the time has come to work more formally, through the channels you 
represent." Here one of the three silent "Haitians" handed Pamela a red 
plastic briefcase. "It contains," Mrs. Roberts mildly explained, "extensive 
evidence of the existence of witches' covens throughout the Metropolitan 
Police." 

Walcott stood up. "We should go now," he said firmly. "Please." Pamela and 
Jumpy rose. Mrs. Roberts nodded vaguely, absently, cracking the joints of 
her loose-skinned hands. "Goodbye," Pamela said, and offered conventional 
regrets. "Girl, don't waste breath," Mrs. Roberts broke in. "Just nail me those 
warlocks. Nail them through the _heart_." 

ooo 

Walcott Roberts dropped them in Notting Hill at ten. Jumpy was coughing 
badly and complaining of the pains in the head that had recurred a number 
of times since his injuries at Shepperton, but when Pamela admitted to being 
nervous at possessing the only copy of the explosive documents in the 
plastic briefcase, Jumpy once again insisted on accompanying her to the 
Brickhall community relations council's offices, where she planned to make 
photocopies to distribute to a number of trusted friends and colleagues. So it 
was that at ten—fifteen they were in Pamela's beloved MG, heading east 
across the city, into the gathering storm. An old, blue Mercedes panel van 
followed them, as it had followed Walcott's pick-up truck; that is, without 

being noticed. 



Fifteen minutes earlier, a patrol group of seven large young Sikhs jammed 
into a Vauxhall Cavalier had been driving over the Malaya Crescent canal 
bridge in southern Brickhall. Hearing a cry from the towpath under the 
bridge, and hurrying to the scene, they found a bland, pale man of medium 
height and build, fair hair flopping forward over hazel eyes, leaping to his 
feet, scalpel in hand, and rushing away from the body of an old woman 
whose blue wig had fallen off and lay floating like a jellyfish in the canal. The 
young Sikhs easily caught up with and overpowered the running man. 
By eleven pm the news of the mass murderer's capture had penetrated 
every cranny of the borough, accompanied by a slew of rumours: the police 
had been reluctant to charge the maniac, the patrol members had been 
detained for questioning, a coverup was being planned. Crowds began to 
gather on street corners, and as the pubs emptied a series of fights broke 
out. There was some damage to property: three cars had their windows 
smashed, a video store was looted, a few bricks were thrown. It was at this 
point, at half—past eleven on a Saturday night, with the clubs and dance- 
halls beginning to yield up their excited, highly charged populations, that the 
divisional superintendent of police, in consultation with higher authority, 
declared that riot conditions now existed in central Brickhall, and unleashed 
the full might of the Metropolitan Police against the "rioters". 
Also at this point, Saladin Chamcha, who had been dining with Allie Cone at 
her apartment overlooking Brickhall Fields, keeping up appearances, 
sympathizing, murmuring encouraging insincerities, emerged into the night; 
found a _testudo_ of helmeted men with plastic shields at the ready moving 
towards him across the Fields at a steady, inexorable trot; witnessed the 
arrival overhead of giant, locust-swarming helicopters from which light was 
falling like heavy rain; saw the advance of the water cannons; and, obeying 
an irresistible primal reflex, turned tail and ran, not knowing that he was 
going the wrong way, running full speed in the direction of the Shaandaar. 
ooo 

Television cameras arrive just in time for the raid on Club Hot Wax. 
This is what a television camera sees: less gifted than the human eye, its 
night vision is limited to what klieg lights will show. A helicopter hovers over 
the nightclub, urinating light in long golden streams; the camera 
understands this image. The machine of state bearing down upon its 
enemies. -- And now there's a camera in the sky; a news editor somewhere 
has sanctioned the cost of aerial photography, and from another helicopter a 
news team is _shooting down_. No attempt is made to chase this helicopter 
away. The noise of rotor blades drowns the noise of the crowd. In this 
respect, again, video recording equipment is less sensitive than, in this case, 
the human ear. 

-- Cut. -- A man lit by a sun-gun speaks rapidly into a microphone. Behind 
him there is a disorderment of shadows. But between the reporter and the 
disordered shadow—lands there stands a wall: men in riot helmets, carrying 



shields. The reporter speaks gravely; petrolbombs plasticbullets 
policeinjuries water-- cannon looting, confining himself, of course, to facts. 
But the camera sees what he does not say. A camera is a thing easily broken 
or purloined; its fragility makes it fastidious. A camera requires law, order, 
the thin blue line. Seeking to preserve itself, it remains behind the shielding 
wall, observing the shadow-lands from afar, and of course from above: that 
is, it chooses sides. 

-- Cut. -- Sun-guns illuminate a new face, saggy-jowled, flushed. This face is 
named: sub—titled words appear across his tunic. _Inspector Stephen 
Kinch_. The camera sees him for what he is: a good man in an impossible 
job. A father, a man who likes his pint. He speaks: cannot— tolerate— no— go- 
areas better-protection--required-for--policemen see— the— plastic— riot— 
shields— catching— fire. He refers to organized crime, political agitators, 
bomb-- factories, drugs. "We understand some of these kids may feel they 
have grievances but we will not and cannot be the whipping boys of society." 
Emboldened by the lights and the patient, silent lenses, he goes further. 
These kids don't know how lucky they are, he suggests. They should consult 
their kith and kin. Africa, Asia, the Caribbean: now those are places with real 
problems. Those are places where people might have grievances worth 
respecting. Things aren't so bad here, not by a long chalk; no slaughters 
here, no torture, no military coups. People should value what they've got 
before they lose it. Ours always was a peaceful land, he says. Our 
industrious island race. — Behind him, the camera sees stretchers, 
ambulances, pain. -- It sees strange humanoid shapes being hauled up from 
the bowels of the Club Hot Wax, and recognizes the effigies of the mighty. 
Inspector Kinch explains. They cook them in an oven down there, they call it 
fun, I wouldn't call it that myself. -- The camera observes the wax models 
with distaste. -- Is there not something _witchy_ about them, something 
cannibalistic, an unwholesome smell? Have _black arts_ been practised here? 
-- The camera sees broken windows. It sees something burning in the 
middle distance: a car, a shop. It cannot understand, or demonstrate, what 
any of this achieves. These people are burning their own streets. 
— Cut. -- Here is a brightly lit video store. Several sets have been left on in 
the windows; the camera, most delirious of narcissists, watches TV, creating, 
for an instant, an infinite recession of television sets, diminishing to a point. 
-- Cut. -- Here is a serious head bathed in light: a studio discussion. The 
head is talking about _outlaws_. Billy the Kid, Ned Kelly: these were men 
who stoodfor as well as _against_. Modern mass-murderers, lacking this 
heroic dimension, are no more than sick, damaged beings, utterly blank as 
personalities, their crimes distinguished by an attention to procedure, to 
methodology — let's say _ritual_ — driven, perhaps, by the nonentity's 
longing to be noticed, to rise out of the. ruck and become, for a moment, a 
star. -- Or by a kind of transposed deathwish: to kill the beloved and so 
destroy the self. -- _Which is the Granny Ripper?_ a questioner asks. _And 



what about Jack?_ -- The true outlaw, the head insists, is a dark mirror- 
image of the hero. -- _These rioters, perhaps?_ comes the challenge. 
_Aren't you in danger of glamorizing, of "legitimizing"?_ -- The head shakes, 
laments the materialism of modern youth. Looting video stores is not what 
the head has been talking about. -- _But what about the old-timers, then? 
Butch Cassidy, the James brothers, Captain Moonlight, the Kelly gang. They 
all robbed -- did they not? -- banks_. -- Cut. -- Later that night, the camera 
will return to this shop-window. The television sets will be missing. 
-- From the air, the camera watches the entrance to Club Hot Wax. Now the 
police have finished with wax effigies and are bringing out real human 
beings. The camera homes in on the arrested persons: a tall albino man; a 
man in an Armani suit, looking like a dark mirror-image of de Niro; a young 
girl of -- what? -- fourteen, fifteen? -- a sullen young man of twenty or 
thereabouts. No names are titled; the camera does not know these faces. 
Gradually, however, the _facts_ emerge. The club DJ, Sewsunker Ram, 
known as "Pinkwalla", and its proprietor, Mr. John Maslama, are to be 
charged with running a large-scale narcotics operation -- crack, brown sugar, 
hashish, cocaine. The man arrested with them, an employee at Maslama's 
nearby "Fair Winds" music store, is the registered owner of a van in which 
an unspecified quantity of "hard drugs" has been discovered; also numbers 
of "hot" video recorders. The young girl's name is Anahita Sufyan; she is 
under-age, is said to have been drinking heavily, and, it is hinted, having 
sex with at least one of the three arrested men. She is further reported to 
have a history of truancy and association with known criminal types: a 
delinquent, clearly. -- An illuminated journalist will offer the nation these 
titbits many hours after the event, but the news is already running wild in 
the streets: Pinkwalla! -- And the _Wax_: they smashed the place up -- 
_totalled_ it! -- Now it's _war_. 

This happens, however -- as does a great deal else -- in places which the 
camera cannot see. 

ooo 

Gibreel: 

moves as if through a dream, because after days of wandering the city 
without eating or sleeping, with the trumpet named Azraeel tucked safely in 
a pocket of his greatcoat, he no longer recognizes the distinction between 
the waking and dreaming states; -- he understands now something of what 
omnipresence must be like, because he is moving through several stories at 
once, there is a Gibreel who mourns his betrayal by Alleluia Cone, and a 
Gibreel hovering over the death-bed of a Prophet, and a Gibreel watching in 
secret over the progress of a 



pilgrimage to the sea, waiting for the moment at which he will reveal himself, 
and a Gibreel who feels, more powerfully every day, the will of the adversary, 
drawing him ever closer, leading him towards their final embrace: the subtle, 
deceiving adversary, who has taken the face of his friend, of Saladin his 
truest friend, in order to lull him into lowering his guard. And there is a 
Gibreel who walks down the streets of London, trying to understand the will 
of God. 

Is he to be the agent of God's wrath? 
Or of his love? 

Is he vengeance or forgiveness? Should the fatal trumpet remain in his 
pocket, or should he take it out and blow? 

(I'm giving him no instructions. I, too, am interested in his choices -- in the 
result of his wrestling match. Character vs destiny: a free-style bout. Two 
falls, two submissions or a knockout will decide.) 
Wrestling, through his many stories, he proceeds. 

There are times when he aches for her, Alleluia, her very name an exaltation; 
but then he remembers the diabolic verses, and turns his thoughts away. 
The horn in his pocket demands to be blown; but he restrains himself. Now 
is not the time. Searching for clues -- _what is to be done?_ -- he stalks the 
city streets. 

Somewhere he sees a television set through an evening window. There is a 
woman's head on the screen, a famous "presenter", being interviewed by an 
equally famous, twinkling Irish "host". -- What would be the worst thing you 
could imagine? -- Oh, I think, I'm sure, it would be, oh, _yes_: to be alone 
on Christmas Eve. You'd really have to face yourself, wouldn't you, you'd 
look into a harsh mirror and ask yourself, _is this all there is?_ -- Gibreel, 
alone, not knowing the date, walks on. In the mirror, the adversary 
approaches at the same pace as his own, beckoning, stretching out his arms. 
The city sends him messages. Here, it says, is where the Dutch king decided 
to live when he came over three centuries ago. In those days this was out of 
town, a village, set in green English fields. But when the King arrived to set 
up house, London squares sprang up amid the fields, red-brick buildings with 
Dutch crenellations rising against the sky, so that his courtiers might have 
places in which to reside. Not all migrants are powerless, the still-standing 
edifices whisper. They impose their needs on their new earth, bringing their 
own coherence to the new-found land, imagining it afresh. But look out, the 
city warns. Incoherence, too, must have its day. Riding in the parkland in 
which he'd chosen to live -- which he'd _civilized_ -- William III was thrown 
by his horse, fell hard against the recalcitrant ground, and broke his royal 
neck. 

Some days he finds himself among walking corpses, great crowds of the 
dead, all of them refusing to admit they're done for, corpses mutinously 
continuing to behave like living people, shopping, catching buses, flirting, 
going home to make love, smoking cigarettes. _But you're dead_, he shouts 



at them. _Zombies, get into your graves_. They ignore him, or laugh, or 
look embarrassed, or menace him with their fists. He falls silent, and hurries 
on. 

The city becomes vague, amorphous. It is becoming impossible to describe 
the world. Pilgrimage, prophet, adversary merge, fade into mists, emerge. 
As does she: Allie, Al--Lat. _She is the exalted bird. Greatly to be desired_. 
He remembers now: she told him, long ago, about Jumpy's poetry. _He's 
trying to make a collection. A book_. The thumb—sucking artist with his 
infernal views. A book is a product of a pact with the Devil that inverts the 
Faustian contract, he'd told Allie. Dr. Faustus sacrificed eternity in return for 
two dozen years of power; the writer agrees to the ruination of his life, and 
gains (but only if he's lucky) maybe not eternity, but posterity, at least. 
Either way (this was Jumpy's point) it's the Devil who wins. 
What does a poet write? Verses. What jingle-jangles in Gibreel's brain? 
Verses. What broke his heart? Verses and again verses. 
The trumpet, Azraeel, calls out from a greatcoat pocket: _Pick me up! 
Yesyesyes: the Trump. To hell with it all, the whole sorry mess: just puff up 
your cheeks and root y-toot-toot. Come on, it's party time_. 
How hot it is: steamy, close, intolerable. This is no Proper London: not this 
improper city. Airstrip One, Mahagonny, Alphaville. He wanders through a 
confusion of languages. Babel: a contraction of the Assyrian "babilu". "The 
gate of God." Babylondon. 
Where's this? 

-- Yes. -- He meanders, one night, behind the cathedrals of the Industrial 
Revolution, the railway termini of north London. Anonymous King's Cross, 
the bat-like menace of the St Pancras tower, the red-and-black gas-holders 
inflating and deflating like giant iron lungs. Where once in battle Queen 
Boudicca fell, Gibreel Farishta wrestles with himself. 

The Goodsway: -- but O what succulent goods lounge in doorways and under 
tungsten lamps, what delicacies are on offer in that way! -- Swinging 
handbags, calling out, silver-skirted, wearing fish-net tights: these are not 
only young goods (average age thirteen to fifteen) but also cheap. They 
have short, identical histories: all have babies stashed away somewhere, all 
have been thrown out of their homes by irate, puritanical parents, none of 
them are white. Pimps with knives take ninety per cent of their earnings. 
Goods are only goods, after all, especially when they're trash. 
-- Gibreel Farishta in the Goodsway is hailed from shadows and lamps; and 
quickens, at first, his pace. _What's this to do with me? Bloody pussies- 
galore_. But then he slows and stops, hearing something else calling to him 
from lamps and shadows, some need, some wordless plea, hidden just under 
the tinny voices of tenpound tarts. His footsteps slow down, then halt. He is 
held by their desires. _For what?_ They are moving towards him now, drawn 
to him like fishes on unseen hooks. As they near him their walks change, 
their hips lose their swagger, their faces start looking their age, in spite of all 



the make--up. When they reach him, they kneel. _Who do you say that I 
am?_ he asks, and wants to add: _I know your names. I met you once 
before, elsewhere, behind a curtain: Twelve of you then as now. Ayesha, 
Hafsah, Ram lah, Sawdah, Zainab, Zainab, Maimunah, Safia, Juwairiyah, 
Umm Salamah the Makhzumite, Rehana the Jew, and the beautiful Mary the 
Copt_. Silently, they remain on their knees. Their wishes are made known to 
him without words. _What is an archangel but a puppet? Kathputli, 
marionette. The faithful bend us to their will. We are forces of nature and 
they, our masters. Mistresses, too_. The heaviness in his limbs, the heat, 
and in his ears a buzzing like bees on summer afternoons. It would be easy 
to faint. 

He does not faint. 

He stands among the kneeling children, waiting for the pimps. 

And when they come, he at last takes out, and presses to his lips, his 

unquiet horn: the exterminator, Azraeel. 

ooo 

After the stream of fire has emerged from the mouth of his golden trumpet 
and consumed the approaching men, wrapping them in a cocoon of flame, 
unmaking them so completely that not even their shoes remain sizzling on 
the sidewalk, Gibreel understands. 

He is walking again, leaving behind him the gratitude of the whores, heading 
in the direction of the borough of Brickhall, Azraeel once more in his 
capacious pocket. Things are becoming clear. 

He is the Archangel Gibreel, the angel of the Recitation, with the power of 
revelation in his hands. He can reach into the breasts of men and women, 
pick out the desires of their inmost hearts, and make them real. He is the 
quencher of desires, the slaker of lusts, the fulfiller of dreams. He is the 
genie of the lamp, and his master is the Roc. 

What desires, what imperatives are in the midnight air? He breathes them in. 
-- And nods, so be it, yes. -- Let it be fire. This is a city that has cleansed 
itself in flame, purged itself by burning down to the ground. 
Fire, falling fire. "This is the judgment of God in his wrath," Gib-- reel 
Farishta proclaims to the riotous night, "that men be granted their heart's 
desires, and that they be by them consumed." 

Low-cost high-rise housing enfolds him. _Nigger eat white man's shit_, 
suggest the unoriginal walls. The buildings have names: "Isandhlwana", 
"Rorke's Drift". But a revisionist enterprise is underway, for two of the four 
towers have been renamed, and bear, now, the names "Mandela" and 
"Toussaintl"Ouverture". --The towers stand up on stilts, and in the concrete 
formlessness beneath and between them there is the howling of a perpetual 
wind, and the eddying of debris: derelict kitchen units, deflated bicycle tyres, 
shards of broken doors, dolls' legs, vegetable refuse extracted from plastic 
disposal bags by hungry cats and dogs, fastfood packets, rolling cans, 
shattered job prospects, abandoned hopes, lost illusions, expended angers, 



accumulated bitterness, vomited fear, and a rusting bath. He stands 
motionless while small groups of residents rush past in different directions. 
Some (not all) are carrying weapons. Clubs, bottles, knives. All of the groups 
contain white youngsters as well as black. He raises his trumpet to his lips 
and begins to play. 

Little buds of flame spring up on the concrete, fuelled by the discarded 
heaps of possessions and dreams. There is a little, rotting pile of envy: it 
burns greenly in the night. The fires are every colour of the rainbow, and not 
all of them need fuel. He blows the little fire-flowers out of his horn and they 
dance upon the concrete, needing neither combustible materials nor roots. 
Here, a pink one! There, what would be nice?, I know: a silver rose. -- And 
now the buds are blossoming into bushes, they are climbing like creepers up 
the sides of the towers, they reach out towards their neighbours, forming 
hedges of multicoloured flame. It is like watching a luminous garden, its 
growth accelerated many thousands of times, a garden blossoming, 
flourishing, becoming overgrown, tangled, becoming impenetrable, a garden 
of dense intertwined chimeras, rivalling in its own incandescent fashion the 
thornwood that sprang up around the palace of the sleeping beauty in 
another fairy-tale, long ago. 

But here, there is no beauty, sleeping within. There is Gibreel Farishta, 
walking in a world of fire. In the High Street he sees houses built of flame, 
with walls of fire, and flames like gathered curtains hanging at the windows. 
-- And there are men and women with fiery skins strolling, running, milling 
around him, dressed in coats of fire. The Street has become red hot, molten, 
a river the colour of blood. -- All, all is ablaze as he toots his merry horn, 
_giving the people what they want_, the hair and teeth of the citizenry are 
smoking and red, glass burns, and birds fly overhead on blazing wings. 
The adversary is very close. The adversary is a magnet, is a whirlpool's eye, 
is the irresistible centre of a black hole, his gravitational force creating an 
event horizon from which neither Gibreel, nor light, can escape. _This way_, 
the adversary calls. _I'm over here_. 

Not a palace, but only a cafe. And in the rooms above, a bed and breakfast 
joint. No sleeping princess, but a disappointed woman, overpowered by 
smoke, lies unconscious here; and beside her, on the floor beside their bed, 
and likewise unconscious, her husband, the Mecca-returned ex- 
schoolteacher, Sufyan. -- While, elsewhere in the burning Shaandaar, 
faceless persons stand at windows waving piteously for help, being unable 
(no mouths) to scream. 
The adversary: there he blows! 

Silhouetted against the backdrop of the ignited Shaandaar Cafe, see, that's 
the very fellow! 

Azraeel leaps unbidden into Farishta's hand. 

Even an archangel may experience a revelation, and when Gibreel catches, 
for the most fleeting of instants, Saladin Chamcha's eye, -- then in that 



fractional and infinite moment the veils are ripped away from his sight, -- he 
sees himself walking with Chamcha in Brickhall Fields, lost in a rhapsody, 
revealing the most intimate secrets of his lovemaking with Alleluia Cone, -- 
those same secrets which afterwards were whispered into telephones by a 
host of evil voices, -- beneath all of which Gibreel now discerns the unifying 
talent of the adversary, who could be guttural and high, who insulted and 
ingratiated, who was both insistent and shy, who was prosaic, -- yes! -- and 
versifying, too. -- And now, at last, Gibreel Farishta recognizes for the first 
time that the adversary has not simply adopted Chamcha's features as a 
disguise; -- nor is this any case of paranormal possession, of body-snatching 
by an invader up from Hell; that, in short, the evil is not external to Saladin, 
but springs from some recess of his own true nature, that it has been 
spreading through his selfhood like a cancer, erasing what was good in him, 
wiping out his spirit, -- and doing so with many deceptive feints and dodges, 
seeming at times to recede; while, in fact, during the illusion of remission, 
under cover of it, so to speak, it continued perniciously to spread; -- and 
now, no doubt, it has filled him up; now there is nothing left of Saladin but 
this, the dark fire of evil in his soul, consuming him as wholly as the other 
fire, multicoloured and engulfing, is devouring the screaming city. Truly 
these are "most horrid, malicious, bloody flames, not like the fine flame of 
an ordinary fire". 

The fire is an arch across the sky. Saladin Chamcha, the adversary, who is 
also _Spoono, my old Chumch_, has disappeared into the doorway of the 
Shaandaar Cafe. This is the maw of the black hole; the horizon closes 
around it, all other possibilities fade, the universe shrinks to this solitary and 
irresistible point. Blowing a great blast on his trumpet, Gibreel plunges 
through the open door. 

ooo 

The building occupied by the Brickhall community relations council was a 
single—storey monster in purple brick with bulletproof windows, a bunker- 
like creation of the 1960s, when such lines were considered sleek. It was not 
an easy building to enter; the door had been fitted with an entryphone and 
opened on to a narrow alley down one side of the building which ended at a 
second, also security-locked, door. There was also a burglar alarm. 
This alarm, it afterwards transpired, had been switched off, probably by the 
two persons, one male, one female, who had effected an entry with the 
assistance of a key. It was officially suggested that these persons had been 
bent on an act of sabotage, an "inside job", since one of them, the dead 
woman, had in fact been an employee of the organization whose offices 
these were. The reasons for the crime remained obscure, and as the 
miscreants had perished in the blaze, it was unlikely that they would ever 
come to light. An "own goal" remained, however, the most probable 
explanation. 

A tragic affair; the dead woman had been heavily pregnant. 



Inspector Stephen Kinch, issuing the statement in which these facts were 
stated, made a "linkage" between the fire at the Brickhall CRC and that at 
the Shaandaar Cafe, where the second dead person, the male, had been a 
semi--permanent resident. It was possible that the man had been the real 
firebug and the woman, who was his mistress although married to and still 
cohabiting with another man, had been no more than his dupe. Political 
motives -- both parties were well known for their radical views -- could not 
be discounted, though such was the muddiness of the water in the far-left 
groupuscules they frequented that it would be hard ever to get a clear 
picture of what such motives might have been. It was also possible that the 
two crimes, even if committed by the same man, could have had different 
motivations. Possibly the man was simply the hired criminal, burning down 
the Shaandaar for the insurance money at the behest of the now-deceased 
owners, and torching the CRC at the behest of his lover, perhaps on account 
of some intra--office vendetta? 

That the burning of the CRC was an act of arson was beyond doubt. 
Quantities of petrol had been poured over desks, papers, curtains. "Many 
people do not understand how quickly a petrol fire spreads," Inspector Kinch 
stated to scribbling journalists. The corpses, which had been so badly burned 
that dental records had been required for identification purposes, had been 
found in the photocopying room. "That's all we have." The end. 
I have more. 

I have certain questions, anyhow. -- About, for instance, an unmarked blue 
Mercedes panel van, which followed Walcott Roberts's pick-up truck, and 
then Pamela Chamcha's MG. -- About the men who emerged from this van, 
their faces behind Hallowe"en masks, and forced their way into the CRC 
offices just as Pamela unlocked the outer door. -- About what really 
happened inside those offices, because purple brick and bulletproof glass 
cannot easily be penetrated by the human eye. -- And about, finally, the 
whereabouts of a red plastic briefcase, and the documents it contains. 
Inspector Kinch? Are you there? 
No. He's gone. He has no answers for me. 

ooo 

Here is Mr. Saladin Chamcha, in the camel coat with the silk collar, running 
down the High Street like some cheap crook. -- The same, terrible Mr. 
Chamcha who has just spent his evening in the company of a distraught 
Alleluia Cone, without feeling a flicker of remorse. — "I look down towards 
his feet," Othello said of Iago, "but that's a fable." Nor is Chamcha fabulous 
any more; his humanity is sufficient form and explanation for his deed. He 
has destroyed what he is not and cannot be; has taken revenge, returning 
treason for treason; and has done so by exploiting his enemy's weakness, 
bruising his unprotected heel. -- There is satisfaction in this. — Still, here is 
Mr. Chamcha, running. The world is full of anger and event. Things hang in 
the balance. A building burns. 



_Boomba_, pounds his heart. _Doomba, boomba, dadoom_. 

Now he sees the Shaandaar, on fire; and comes to a skidding halt. He has a 

constricted chest; -- _badoomba!_ -- and there's a pain in his left arm. He 

doesn't notice; is staring at the burning building. 

And sees Gibreel Farishta. 

And turns; and runs inside. 

"Mishal! Sufyan! Hind!" cries evil Mr. Chamcha. The ground floor is not as 
yet ablaze. He flings open the door to the stairs, and a scalding, pestilential 
wind drives him back. _Dragon's breath_, he thinks. The landing is on fire; 
the flames reach in sheets from floor to ceiling. No possibility of advance. 
"Anybody?" screams Saladin Chamcha. "Is anybody there?" But the dragon 
roars louder than he can shout. 

Something invisible kicks him in the chest, sends him toppling backwards, 
on to the cafe floor, amid the empty tables. _Doom_, sings his heart. _Take 
this. And this_. 

There is a noise above his head like the scurrying of a billion rats, spectral 
rodents following a ghostly piper. He looks up: the ceiling is on fire. He finds 
he cannot stand. As he watches, a section of the ceiling detaches itself, and 
he sees the segment of beam falling towards him. He crosses his arms in 
feeble self-- defence. 

The beam pins him to the floor, breaking both his arms. His chest is full of 
pain. The world recedes. Breathing is hard. He can't speak. He is the Man of 
a Thousand Voices, and there isn't one left. 
Gibreel Farishta, holding Azraeel, enters the Shaandaar Cafe. 

ooo 

_What happens when you win? When your enemies are at your mercy: 

how will you act then? Compromise is the temptation of the weak; this is the 
test for the strong_. -- "Spoono," Gibreel nods at the fallen man. "You really 
fooled me, mister; seriously, you're quite a guy." — And Chamcha, seeing 
what's in Gibreel's eyes, cannot deny the knowledge he sees there. "Wha," 
he begins, and gives up. _What are you going to do?_ Fire is falling all 
around them now: a sizzle of golden rain. "Why'd you do it?" Gibreel asks, 
then dismisses the question with a wave of the hand. "Damnfool thing to be 
asking. Might as well inquire, what possessed you to rush in here? Damnfool 
thing to do. People, eh, Spoono? Crazy bastards, that's all." 
Now there are pools of fire all around them. Soon they will be encircled, 
marooned in a temporary island amid this lethal sea. Chamcha is kicked a 
second time in the chest, and jerks violently. Facing three deaths -- by fire, 
by "natural causes", and by Gibreel -- he strains desperately, trying to speak, 
but only croaks emerge. "Fa. Gur. Mmm." _Forgive me_. "Ha. Pa." _Have 
pity_. The cafe tables are burning. More beams fall from above. Gibreel 
seems to have fallen into a trance. He repeats, vaguely: "Bloody damnfool 
things." 



Is it possible that evil is never total, that its victory, no matter how 
overwhelming, is never absolute? 

Consider this fallen man. He sought without remorse to shatter the mind of a 
fellow human being; and exploited, to do so, an entirely blameless woman, 
at least partly owing to his own impossible and voyeuristic desire for her. Yet 
this same man has risked death, with scarcely any hesitation, in a foolhardy 
rescue attempt. 
What does this mean? 

The fire has closed around the two men, and smoke is everywhere. It can 
only be a matter of seconds before they are overcome. There are more 
urgent questions to answer than the _damnfool_ ones above. 
What choice will Farishta make? 
Does he have a choice? 

Gibreel lets fall his trumpet; stoops; frees Saladin from the prison of the 
fallen beam; and lifts him in his arms. Chamcha, with broken ribs as well as 
arms, groans feebly, sounding like the creationist Dumsday before he got a 
new tongue of choicest rump. "Ta. La." _It's too late_. A little lick of fire 
catches at the hem of his coat. Acrid black smoke fills all available space, 
creeping behind his eyes, deafening his ears, clogging his nose and lungs. -- 
Now, however, Gibreel Farishta begins softly to exhale, a long, continuous 
exhalation of extraordinary duration, and as his breath blows towards the 
door it slices through the smoke and fire like a knife; -- and Saladin 
Chamcha, gasping and fainting, with a mule inside his chest, seems to see -- 
but will ever afterwards be unsure if it was truly so -- the fire parting before 
them like the red sea it has become, and the smoke dividing also, like a 
curtain or a veil; until there lies before them a clear pathway to the door; -- 
whereupon Gibreel Farishta steps quickly forward, bearing Saladin along the 
path of forgiveness into the hot night air; so that on a night when the city is 
at war, a night heavy with enmity and rage, there is this small redeeming 
victory for love. 

ooo 

Conclusions. 

Mishal Sufyan is outside the Shaandaar when they emerge, weeping for her 
parents, being comforted by Hanif. -- It is Gibreel's turn to collapse; still 
carrying Saladin, he passes out at Mishal's feet. 

Now Mishal and Hanif are in an ambulance with the two unconscious men, 
and while Chamcha has an oxygen mask over his nose and mouth Gibreel, 
suffering nothing worse than exhaustion, is talking in his sleep: a delirious 
babble about a magic trumpet and the fire that he blew, like music, from its 
mouth. -- And Mishal, who remembers Chamcha as a devil, and has come to 
accept the possibility of many things, wonders: "Do you think -- ?" -- But 
Hanif is definite, firm. "Not a chance. This is Gibreel Farishta, the actor, 
don't you recognize? Poor guy's just playing out some movie scene." Mishal 
won't let it go. "But, Hanif," -- and he becomes emphatic. Speaking gently, 



because she has just been orphaned, after all, he absolutely insists. "What 
has happened here in Brickhall tonight is a socio-political phenomenon. 
Let's not fall into the trap of some damn mysticism. We're talking about 
history: an event in the history of Britain. About the process of change." At 
once Gibreel's voice changes, and his subject—matter also. He mentions 

_pilgrims_, and a _dead baby_, and li ke in "The Ten Commandments"_, 

and a _decaying mansion_, and a _tree_; because in the aftermath of the 
purifying fire he is dreaming, for the very last time, one of his serial dreams; 
-- and Hanif says: "Listen, Mishu, darling. Just make-believe, that's all." He 
puts his arm around her, kisses her cheek, holding her fast. _Stay with me. 
The world is real. We have to live in it; we have to live here, to live on_. 
Just then Gibreel Farishta, still asleep, shouts at the top of his voice. 
"Mishal! Come back! Nothing's happening! Mishal, for pity's sake; turn 
around, come back, come back." 



VIII The Parting of the Arabian Sea 



It had been the habit of Srinivas the toy merchant to threaten his wife and 
children, from time to time, that one day, when the material world had lost 
its savour, he would drop everything, including his name, and turn sanyasi, 
wandering from village to village with a begging bowl and a stick. Mrs. 
Srinivas treated these threats tolerantly, knowing that her gelatinous and 
good-humoured husband liked to be thought of as a devout man, but also a 
bit of an adventurer (had he not insisted on that absurd and scarifying flight 
into the Grand Canyon in Amrika years ago?); the idea of becoming a 
mendicant holy man satisfied both needs. Yet, when she saw his ample 
posterior so comfortably ensconced in an armchair on their front porch, 
looking out at the world through stout wire netting, -- or when she watched 
him playing with their youngest daughter, fiveyear-old Minoo, -- or when she 
observed that his appetite, far from diminishing to begging-bowl proportions, 
was increasing contentedly with the passing years — then Mrs. Srinivas 
puckered up her lips, adopted the insouciant expression of a film beauty 
(though she was as plump and wobbling as her spouse) and went whistling 
indoors. As a result, when she found his chair empty, with his glass of lime- 
juice unfinished on one of its arms, it took her completely by surprise. To tell 
the truth, Srinivas himself could never properly explain what made him leave 
the comfort of his morning porch and stroll across to watch the arrival of the 
villagers of Titlipur. The urchin boys who knew everything an hour before it 
happened had been shouting in the street about an improbable procession of 
people coming with bags and baggage down the potato track towards the 
grand trunk road, led by a girl with silver hair, with great exclamations of 
butterflies over their heads, and, bringing up the rear, Mirza Saeed Akhtar in 
his olive—green Mercedes-Benz station wagon, looking like a mango-stone 
had got stuck in his throat. 

For all its potato silos and famous toy factories, Chatnapatna was not such a 
big place that the arrival of one hundred and fifty persons could pass 
unnoticed. Just before the procession arrived Srinivas had received a 
deputation from his factory workers, asking for permission to close down 
operations for a couple of hours so that they could witness the great event. 
Knowing they would probably take the time off anyway, he agreed. But he 
himself remained, for a time, stubbornly planted on his porch, trying to 
pretend, that the butterflies of excitement had not begun to stir in his 
capacious stomach. Later, he would confide to Mishal Akhtar: "It was a 
presentiment. What to say? I knew you-all were not here for refreshments 
only. She had come for me." 

Titlipur arrived in Chatnapatna in a consternation of howling babies, shouting 
children, creaking oldsters, and sour jokes from the Osman of the boom- 



boom bullock for whom Srinivas did not care one jot. Then the urchins 
informed the toy king that among the travellers were the wife and mother- 
in-law of the zamindar Mirza Saeed, and they were on foot like the 
peasants, wearing simple kurta— pajamas and no jewels at all. This was the 
point at which Srinivas lumbered over to the roadside canteen around which 
the Titlipur pilgrims were crowding while potato bhurta and parathas were 
handed round. He arrived at the same time as the Chatnapatna police jeep. 
The Inspector was standing on the passenger seat, shouting through a 
megaphone that he intended to take strong action against this "communal" 
march if it was not disbanded at once. Hindu— Muslim business, Srinivas 
thought; bad, bad. 

The police were treating the pilgrimage as some kind of sectarian 
demonstration, but when Mirza Saeed Akhtar stepped forward and told the 
Inspector the truth the officer became confused. Sri Srinivas, a Brahmin, 
was obviously not a man who had ever considered making a pilgrimage to 
Mecca, but he was impressed nevertheless. He pushed up through the crowd 
to hear what the zamindar was saying: "And it is the purpose of these good 
people to walk to the Arabian Sea, believing as they do that the waters will 
part for them." Mirza Saeed's voice sounded weak, and the Inspector, 
Chatnapatna's Station Head Officer, was unconvinced. "Are you serious, ji?" 
Mirza Saeed said: "Not me. They, but, are serious as hell. I'm planning to 
change their minds before anything crazy happens." The SHO, all straps, 
moustachioes and self-importance, shook his head. "But, see here, sir, how 
can I permit so many individuals to congregate on the street? Tempers can 
be inflamed; incident is possible." Just then the crowd of pilgrims parted and 
Srinivas saw for the first time the fantastic figure of the girl dressed entirely 
in butterflies, with snowy hair flowing down as far as her ankles. "Arre deo," 
he shouted, "Ayesha, is it you?" And added, foolishly: "Then where are my 
Family Planning dolls?" 

His outburst was ignored; everybody was watching Ayesha as she 
approached the puff-chested SHO. She said nothing, but smiled and nodded, 
and the fellow seemed to grow twenty years younger, until in the manner of 
a boy often or eleven he said, "Okay okay, mausi. Sorry, ma. No offence. I 
beg your pardon, please." That was the end of the police trouble. Later that 
day, in the afternoon heat, a group of town youths known to have RSS and 
Vishwa Hindu Parishad connections began throwing stones from nearby 
rooftops; whereupon the Station Head Officer had them arrested and in jail 
in two minutes flat. 

"Ayesha, daughter," Srinivas said aloud to the empty air, "what the hell 
happened to you?" 

During the heat of the day the pilgrims rested in whatever shade they could 
find. Srinivas wandered among them in a kind of daze, filled up with emotion, 
realizing that a great turning-- point in his life had unaccountably arrived. 
His eyes kept searching out the transformed figure of Ayesha the seer, who 



was resting in the shade of a pipal-tree in the company of Mishal Akhtar, her 
mother Mrs. Qureishi, and the lovesick Osman with his bullock. Eventually 
Srinivas bumped into the zamindar Mirza Saeed, who was stretched out on 
the back seat of his Mercedes— Benz, unsleeping, a man in torment. Srinivas 
spoke to him with a humbleness born of his wonderment. "Sethji, you don't 
believe in the girl?" "Srinivas," Mirza Saeed sat up to reply, "we are modern 
men. We know, for instance, that old people die on long journeys, that God 
does not cure cancer, and that oceans do not part. We have to stop this 
idiocy. Come with me. Plenty of room in the car. Maybe you can help to talk 
them out of it; that Ayesha, she's grateful to you, perhaps she'll listen." 
"To come in the car?" Srinivas felt helpless, as though mighty hands were 
gripping his limbs. "There is my business, but." 

"This is a suicide mission for many of our people," Mirza Saeed urged him. "I 
need help. Naturally I could pay." 

"Money is no object," Srinivas retreated, affronted. "Excuse, please, Sethji. I 
must consider." 

"Don't you see?" Mirza Saeed shouted after him. "We are not communal 
people, you and I. Hindu—Muslim bhai-bhai! We can open up a secular front 
against this mumbo-jumbo." 

Srinivas turned back. "But I am not an unbeliever," he protested. "The 
picture of goddess Lakshmi is always on my wall." 
"Wealth is an excellent goddess for a businessman," Mirza Saeed said. 
"And in my heart," Srinivas added. Mirza Saeed lost his temper. "But 
goddesses, I swear. Even your own philosophers admit that these are 
abstract concepts only. Embodiments of shakti which is itself an abstract 
notion: the dynamic power of the gods." 

The toy merchant was looking down at Ayesha as she slept under her quilt of 
butterflies. "I am no philosopher, Sethji," he said. And did not say that his 
heart had leapt into his mouth because he had realized that the sleeping girl 
and the goddess in the calendar on his factory wall had the identical, same- 
to-same, face. 

ooo 

When the pilgrimage left town, Srinivas accompanied it, turning a deaf ear 
to the entreaties of his wild-haired wife who picked up Minoo and shook her 
in her husband's face. He explained to Ayesha that while he did not wish to 
visit Mecca he had been seized by a longing to walk with her a while, 
perhaps even as far as the sea. 

As he took his place among the Titlipur villagers and fell into step with the 
man next to him, he observed with a mixture of incomprehension and awe 
that infinite butterfly swarm over their heads, like a gigantic umbrella 
shading the pilgrims from the sun. It was as if the butterflies of Titlipur had 
taken over the functions of the great tree. Next he gave a little cry of fear, 
astonishment and pleasure, because a few dozen of those chameleon- 
winged creatures had settled on his shoulders and turned, upon the instant, 



the exact shade of scarlet of his shirt. Now he recognized the man at his side 
as the Sarpanch, Muhammad Din, who had chosen not to walk at the front. 
He and his wife Khadija strode contentedly forward in spite of their advanced 
years, and when he saw the lepidopteral blessing that had descended on the 
toy merchant, Muhammad Din reached out and grasped him by the hand, 
ooo 

It was becoming clear that the rains would fail. Lines of bony cattle migrated 
across the landscape, searching for a drink. _Love is Water_, someone had 
written in whitewash on the brick wall of a scooter factory. On the road they 
met other families heading south with their lives bundled up on the backs of 
dying donkeys, and these, too, were heading hopefully towards water. "But 
not bloody salt water," Mirza Saeed shouted at the Titlipur pilgrims. "And not 
to see it divide itself in two! They want to stay alive, but you crazies want to 
die." Vultures herded together by the roadside and watched the pilgrims 
pass. 

Mirza Saeed spent the first weeks of the pilgrimage to the Arabian Sea in a 
state of permanent, hysterical agitation. Most of the walking was done in the 
mornings and late afternoons, and at these times Saeed would often leap 
out of his station wagon to plead with his dying wife. "Come to your senses, 
Mishu. You're a sick woman. Come and lie down at least, let me press your 
feet a while." But she refused, and her mother shooed him away. "See, 
Saeed, you're in such a negative mood, it gets depressing. Go and drink 
your Coke-shoke in your AC vehicle and leave us yatris in peace." After the 
first week the Air Conditioned vehicle lost its driver. Mirza Saeed's chauffeur 
resigned and joined the foot-pilgrims; the zamindar was obliged to get 
behind the wheel himself. After that, when his anxiety overcame him, it was 
necessary to stop the car, park, and then rush madly back and forth among 
the pilgrims, threatening, entreating, offering bribes. At least once a day he 
cursed Ayesha to her face for ruining his life, but he could never keep up the 
abuse because every time he looked at her he desired her so much that he 
felt ashamed. The cancer had begun to turn Mishal's skin grey, and Mrs. 
Qureishi, too, was beginning to fray at the edges; her society chappals had 
disintegrated and she was suffering from frightful foot-blisters that looked 
like little water--balloons. When Saeed offered her the comfort of the car, 
however, she continued to refuse point-blank. The spell that Ayesha had 
placed upon the pilgrims was still holding firm. -- And at the end of these 
sorties into the heart of the pilgrimage Mirza Saeed, sweating and giddy 
from the heat and his growing despair, would realize that the marchers had 
left his car some way behind, and he would have to totter back to it by 
himself, sunk in gloom. One day he got back to the station wagon to find 
that an empty coconut-shell thrown from the window of a passing bus had 
smashed his laminated windscreen, which looked, now, like a spider's web 
full of diamond flies. He had to knock all the pieces out, and the glass 
diamonds seemed to be mocking him as they fell on to the road and into the 



car, they seemed to speak of the transience and worthlessness of earthly 
possessions, but a secular man lives in the world of things and Mirza Saeed 
did not intend to be broken as easily as a windscreen. At night he would go 
to lie beside his wife on a bedroll under the stars by the side of the grand 
trunk road. When he told her about the accident she offered him cold 
comfort. "It's a sign," she said. "Abandon the station wagon and join the rest 
of us at last." 

"Abandon a Mercedes-Benz?" Saeed yelped in genuine horror. 
"So what?" Mishal replied in her grey, exhausted voice. "You keep talking 
about ruination. Then what difference is a Mercedes going to make?" 
"You don't understand," Saeed wept. "Nobody understands me." 
Gibreel dreamed a drought: 

The land browned under the rainless skies. The corpses of buses and ancient 
monuments rotting in the fields beside the crops. Mirza Saeed saw, through 
his shattered windscreen, the onset of calamity: the wild donkeys fucking 
wearily and dropping dead, while still conjoined, in the middle of the road, 
the trees standing on roots exposed by soil erosion and looking like huge 
wooden claws scrabbling for water in the earth, the destitute farmers being 
obliged to work for the state as manual labourers, digging a reservoir by the 
trunk road, an empty container for the rain that wouldn't fall. Wretched 
roadside lives: a woman with a bundle heading for a tent of stick and rag, a 
girl condemned to scour, each day, this pot, this pan, in her patch of filthy 
dust. "Are such lives really worth as much as ours?" Mirza Saeed Akhtar 
asked himself. "As much as mine? As MishaT's? How little they have 
experienced, how little they have on which to feed the soul." A man in a 
dhoti and loose yellow pugri stood like a bird on top of a milestone, perched 
there with one foot on the opposite knee, one hand under the opposite 
elbow, smoking a bin. As Mirza Saeed Akhtar passed him he spat, and 
caught the zamindar full in the face. 

The pilgrimage advanced slowly, three hours' walking in the mornings, three 
more after the heat, walking at the pace of the slowest pilgrim, subject to 
infinite delays, the sickness of children, the harassment of the authorities, a 
wheel coming off one of the bullock carts; two miles a day at best, one 
hundred and fifty miles to the sea, a journey of approximately eleven weeks. 
The first death happened on the eighteenth day. Khadija, the tactless old 
lady who had been for half a century the contented and contenting spouse of 
Sarpanch Muhammad Din, saw an archangel in a dream. "Gibreel," she 
whispered, "is it you?" 

"No," the apparition replied. "It's I, Azraeel, the one with the lousy job. 
Excuse the disappointment." 

The next morning she continued with the pilgrimage, saying nothing to her 
husband about her vision. After two hours they neared the ruin of one of the 
Mughal milepost inns that had, in times long gone, been built at five--mile 
intervals along the highway. When Khadija saw the ruin she knew nothing of 



its past, of the wayfarers robbed in their sleep and so on, but she 
understood its present well enough. "I have to go in there and lie down," she 
said to the Sarpanch, who protested: "But, the march!" "Never mind that," 
she said gently. "You can catch them up later." 

She lay down in the rubble of the old ruin with her head on a smooth stone 
which the Sarpanch found for her. The old man wept, but that didn't do any 
good, and she was dead within a minute. He ran back to the march and 
confronted Ayesha angrily. "I should never have listened to you," he told her. 
"And now you have killed my wife." 

The march stopped. Mirza Saeed Akhtar, spotting an opportunity, insisted 
loudly that Khadija be taken to a proper Muslim burial ground. But Ayesha 
objected. "We are ordered by the archangel to go directly to the sea, without 
returns or detours." Mirza Saeed appealed to the pilgrims. "She is your 
Sarpanch's beloved wife," he shouted. "Will you dump her in a hole by the 
side of the road?" 

When the Titlipur villagers agreed that Khadija should be buried at once, 
Saeed could not believe his ears. He realized that their determination was 
even greater than he had suspected: even the bereaved Sarpanch 
acquiesced. Khadija was buried in the corner of a barren field behind the 
ruined way-station of the past. 

The next day, however, Mirza Saeed noticed that the Sarpanch had come 
unstuck from the pilgrimage, and was mooching along disconsolately, a little 
distance apart from the rest, sniffing the bougainvillaea bushes. Saeed 
jumped out of the Mercedes and rushed off to Ayesha, to make another 
scene. "You monster!" he shouted. "Monster without a heart! Why did you 
bring the old woman here to die?" She ignored him, but on his way back to 
the station wagon the Sarpanch came over and said: "We were poor people. 
We knew we could never hope to go to Mecca Sharif, until she persuaded. 
She persuaded, and now see the outcome of her deeds." 
Ayesha the kahin asked to speak to the Sarpanch, but gave him not a single 
word of consolation. "Harden your faith," she scolded him. "She who dies on 
the great pilgrimage is assured of a home in Paradise. Your wife is sitting 
now among the angels and the flowers; what is there for you to regret?" 
That evening the Sarpanch Muhammad Din approached Mirza Saeed as he 
sat by a small campfire. "Excuse, Sethji," he said, "but is it possible that I 
ride, as you once offered, in your motor--car?" 

Unwilling wholly to abandon the project for which his wife had died, unable 
to maintain any longer the absolute belief which the enterprise required, 
Muhammad Din entered the station wagon of scepticism. "My first convert," 
Mirza Saeed rejoiced. 

ooo 

By the fourth week the defection of Sarpanch Muhammad Din had begun to 
have its effect. He sat on the back seat of the Mercedes as if he were the 
zamindar and Mirza Saeed the chauffeur, and little by little the leather 



upholstery and the airconditioning unit and the whisky-soda cabinet and the 
electrically operated mirror-glass windows began to teach him hauteur; his 
nose tilted into the air and he acquired the supercilious expression of a man 
who can see without being seen. Mirza Saeed in the driver's seat felt his 
eyes and nose filling up with the dust that came in through the hole where 
the windscreen used to be, but in spite of such discomforts he was feeling 
better than before. Now, at the end of each day, a cluster of pilgrims would 
congregate around the Mercedes-Benz with its gleaming star, and Mirza 
Saeed would try and talk sense into them while they watched Sarpanch 
Muhammad Din raise and lower the mirrorglass rear windows, so that they 
saw, alternately, his features and their own. The Sarpanch's presence in the 
Mercedes lent new authority to Mirza Saeed's words. 
Ayesha didn't try to call the villagers away, and so far her confidence had 
been justified; there had been no further defections to the camp of the 
faithless. But Saeed saw her casting numerous glances in his direction and 
whether she was a visionary or not Mirza Saeed would have bet good money 
that those were the bad-tempered glances of a young girl who was no longer 
sure of getting her own way. 
Then she disappeared. 

She went off during an afternoon siesta and did not reappear for a day and a 
half, by which time there was pandemonium among the pilgrims -- she 
always knew how to whip up an audience's feelings, Saeed conceded; then 
she sauntered back up to them across the dust--clouded landscape, and this 
time her silver hair was streaked with gold, and her eyebrows, too, were 
golden. She summoned the villagers to her and told them that the archangel 
was displeased that the people of Titlipur had been filled up with doubts just 
because of the ascent of a martyr to Paradise. She warned that he was 
seriously thinking of withdrawing his offer to part the waters, "so that all 
you'll get at the Arabian Sea is a salt—water bath, and then it's back to your 
deserted potato fields on which no rain will ever fall again." The villagers 
were appalled. "No, it can't be," they pleaded. "Bibiji, forgive us." It was the 
first time they had used the name of the longago saint to describe the girl 
who was leading them with an absolutism that had begun to frighten them 
as much as it impressed. After her speech the Sarpanch and Mirza Saeed 
were left alone in the station wagon. "Second round to the archangel," Mirza 
Saeed thought. 

ooo 

By the fifth week the health of most of the older pilgrims had deteriorated 
sharply, food supplies were running low, water was hard to find, and the 
children's tear ducts were dry. The vulture herds were never far away. 
As the pilgrims left behind the rural areas and came towards more densely 
populated zones, the level of harassment increased. The long—distance 
buses and trucks often refused to deviate and the pedestrians had to leap, 
screaming and tumbling over each other, out of their way. Cyclists, families 



of six on Rajdoot motor- -scooters, petty shop—keepers hurled abuse. 
"Crazies! Hicks! Muslims!" Often they were obliged to keep marching for an 
entire night because the authorities in this or that small town didn't want 
such riff-raff sleeping on their pavements. More deaths became inevitable. 
Then the bullock of the convert, Osman, fell to its knees amid the bicycles 
and camel-dung of a nameless little town. "Get up, idiot," he yelled at it 
impotently. "What do you think you're doing, dying on me in front of the 
fruit— stalls of strangers?" The bullock nodded, twice for yes, and expired. 
Butterflies covered the corpse, adopting the colour of its grey hide, its horn- 
cones and bells. The inconsolable Osman ran to Ayesha (who had put on a 
dirty sari as a concession to urban prudery, even though butterfly clouds still 
trailed off her like glory). "Do bullocks go to Heaven?" he asked in a piteous 
voice; she shrugged. "Bullocks have no souls," she said coolly, "and it is 
souls we march to save." Osman looked at her and realized he no longer 
loved her. "You've become a demon," he told her in disgust. 
"I am nothing," Ayesha said. "I am a messenger." 

"Then tell me why your God is so anxious to destroy the innocent," Osman 
raged. "What's he afraid of? Is he so unconfident that he needs us to die to 
prove our love?" 

As though in response to such blasphemy, Ayesha imposed even stricter 
disciplinary measures, insisting that all pilgrims say all five prayers, and 
decreeing that Fridays would be days of fasting. By the end of the sixth 
week she had forced the marchers to leave four more bodies where they fell: 
two old men, one old woman, and one six-year-old girl. The pilgrims 
marched on, turning their backs on the dead; behind them, however, Mirza 
Saeed Akhtar gathered up the bodies and made sure they received a decent 
burial. In this he was assisted by the Sarpanch, Muhammad Din, and the 
former untouchable, Osman. On such days they would fall quite a way 
behind the march, but a Mercedes-Benz station wagon doesn't take long to 
catch up with over a hundred and forty men, women and children walking 
wearily towards the sea. 

ooo 

The dead grew in number, and the groups of unsettled pilgrims around the 
Mercedes got larger night by night. Mirza Saeed began to tell them stories. 
He told them about lemmings, and how the enchantress Circe turned men 
into pigs; he told, too, the story of a pipe-player who lured a town's children 
into a mountain-crack. When he had told this tale in their own language he 
recited verses in English, so that they could listen to the music of the poetry 
even though they didn't understand the words. "Hamelin town's in 
Brunswick," he began. "Near famous Hanover City. The River Weser, deep 
and wide, washes its walls on the southern side . . ." 
Now he had the satisfaction of seeing the girl Ayesha advance, looking 
furious, while the butterflies glowed like the campfire behind her, making it 
appear as though flames were streaming from her body. 



"Those who listen to the Devil's verses, spoken in the Devil's tongue," she 
cried, "will go to the Devil in the end." 

"It's a choice, then," Mirza Saeed answered her, "between the devil and the 
deep blue sea." 

ooo 

Eight weeks had passed, and relations between Mirza Saeed and his wife 
Mishal had so deteriorated that they were no longer on speaking terms. By 
now, and in spite of the cancer that had turned her as grey as funeral ash, 
Mishal had become Ayesha's chief lieutenant and most devoted disciple. The 
doubts of other marchers had only strengthened her own faith, and for these 
doubts she unequivocally blamed her husband. 

"Also," she had rebuked him in their last conversation, "there is no warmth 
in you any more. I feel afraid to approach." 

"No warmth?" he yelled. "How can you say it? No warmth? For whom did I 
come running on this damnfool pilgrimage? To look after whom? Because I 
love whom? Because I am so worried about, so sad about, so filled with 
misery about whom? No warmth? Are you a stranger? How can you say such 
a thing?" 

"Listen to yourself," she said in a voice which had begun to fade into a kind 

of smokiness, an opacity. "Always anger. Cold anger, icy, like a fort." 

"This isn't anger," he bellowed. "This is anxiety, unhappiness, wretchedness, 

injury, pain. Where can you hear anger?" 

"I hear it," she said. "Everyone can hear, for miles around." 

"Come with me," he begged her. "I'll take you to the top clinics in Europe, 

Canada, the USA. Trust in Western technology. They can do marvels. You 

always liked gadgets, too." 

"I am going on a pilgrimage to Mecca," she said, and turned away. 
"You damn .stupid bitch," he roared at her back. "Just because you're going 
to die doesn't mean you have to take all these people with you." But she 
walked away across the roadside camp--site, never looking back; and now 
that he'd proved her point by losing control and speaking the unspeakable 
he fell to his knees and wept. After that quarrel Mishal refused to sleep 
beside him any more. She and her mother rolled out their bedding next to 
the butterfly-shrouded prophetess of their Meccan quest. 
By day, Mishal worked ceaselessly among the pilgrims, reassuring them, 
bolstering their faith, gathering them together beneath the wing of her 
gentleness. Ayesha had started retreating deeper and deeper into silence, 
and Mishal Akhtar became, to all intents and purposes, the leader of the 
pilgrims. But there was one pilgrim over whom she lost her grip: Mrs. 
Qureishi, her mother, the wife of the director of the state bank. 
The arrival of Mr. Qureishi, Mishal's father, was quite an event. The pilgrims 
had stopped in the shade of a line of plane-trees and were busy gathering 
brushwood and scouring cookpots when the motorcade was sighted. At once 
Mrs. Qureishi, who was twenty-five pounds lighter than she had been at the 



beginning of the walk, leaped squeakily to her feet and tried frantically to 
brush the dirt off her clothes and to put her hair in order. Mishal saw her 
mother fumbling feebly with a molten lipstick and asked, "What's bugging 
you, ma? Relax, na." 

Her mother pointed feebly at the approaching cars. Moments later the tall, 
severe figure of the great banker was standing over them. "If I had not seen 
it I would not have believed," he said. "They told me, but I pooh-poohed. 
Therefore it took me this long to find out. To vanish from Peristan without a 
word: now what in tarnation?" 

Mrs. Qureishi shook helplessly under her husband's eyes, beginfling to cry, 
feeling the calluses on her feet and the fatigue that had sunk into every pore 
of her body. "O God, I don't know, I am sorry," she said. "God knows what 
came over." 

"Don't you know I occupy a delicate post?" Mr. Qureishi cried. "Public 
confidence is of essence. How does it look then that my wife gallivants with 
bhangis?" 

Mishal, embracing her mother, told her father to stop bullying. Mr. Akhtar 
saw for the first time that his daughter had the mark of death on her 
forehead and deflated instantly like an inner tube. Mishal told him about the 
cancer, and the promise of the seer Ayesha that a miracle would occur in 
Mecca, and she would be completely cured. 

"Then let me fly you to Mecca, pronto," her father pleaded. "Why walk if you 
can go by Airbus?" 

But Mishal was adamant. "You should go away," she told her father. "Only 
the faithful can make this thing come about. Mummy will look after me." 
Mr. Qureishi in his limousine helplessly joined Mirza Saeed at the rear of the 
procession, constantly sending one of the two servants who had 
accompanied him on motor-scooters to ask Mishal if she would like food, 
medicine, Thums Up, anything at all. Mishal turned down all his offers, and 
after three days -- because banking is banking -- Mr. Qureishi departed for 
the city, leaving behind one of the motor—scooter chaprassis to serve the 
women. "He is yours to command," he told them. "Don't be stupid now. 
Make this as easy as you can." 

The day after Mr. Qureishi's departure, the chaprassi Gul Muhammad ditched 
his scooter and joined the foot-pilgrims, knotting a handkerchief around his 
head to indicate his devotion. Ayesha said nothing, but when she saw the 
scooter-wallah join the pilgrimage she grinned an impish grin that reminded 
Mirza Saeed that she was, after all, not on"y a figure out of a dream, but 
also a flesh-and-blood young girl. 

Mrs. Qureishi began to complain. The brief contact with her old life had 
broken her resolve, and now that it was too late she had started thinking 
constantly about parties and soft cushions and glasses of iced fresh lime 
soda. It suddenly seemed wholly unreasonable to her that a person of her 



breeding should be asked to go barefoot like a common sweeper. She 

presented herself to Mirza Saeed with a sheepish expression on her face. 

"Saeed, son, do you hate me completely?" she wheedled, her plump features 

arranging themselves in a parody of coquettishness. 

Saeed was appalled by her grimace. "Of course not," he managed to say. 

"But you do, you loathe me, and my cause is hopeless," she flirted. 

"Ammaji," Saeed gulped, "what are you saying?" 

"Because I have from time to time spoken roughly to you." 

"Please forget it," Saeed said, bemused by her performance, but she would 

not. "You must know it was all for love, isn't it? Love," said Mrs. Qureishi, "it 

is a many--splendoured thing." 

"Makes the world go round," Mirza Saeed agreed, trying to enter into the 
spirit of the conversation. 

"Love conquers all," Mrs. Qureishi confirmed. "It has conquered my anger. 
This I must demonstrate to you by riding with you in your motor." 
Mirza Saeed bowed. "It is yours, Ammaji." 

"Then you will ask those two village men to sit in front with you. Ladies must 
be protected, isn't it?" 
"It is," he replied. 

ooo 

The story of the village that was walking to the sea had spread all over the 
country, and in the ninth week the pilgrims were being pestered by 
journalists, local politicos in search of votes, businessmen who offered to 
sponsor the march if the yatris would only consent to wear sandwich boards 
advertising various goods and services, foreign tourists looking for the 
mysteries of the East, nostalgic Gandhians, and the kind of human vultures 
who go to motor—car races to watch the crashes. When they saw the host of 
chameleon butterflies and the way they both clothed the girl Ayesha and 
provided her with her only solid food, these visitors were amazed, and 
retreated with confounded expectations, that is to say with a hole in their 
pictures of the world that they could not paper over. Photographs of Ayesha 
were appearing in all the papers, and the pilgrims even passed advertising 
hoardings on which the lepidopteral beauty had been painted three times as 
large as life, beside slogans reading _Our cloths also are as delicate as a 
butterfly's wing_, or suchlike. Then more alarming news reached them. 
Certain religious extremist groupings had issued statements denouncing the 
"Ayesha Haj" as an attempt to "hijack" public attention and to "incite 
communal sentiment". Leaflets were being distributed — Mishal picked them 
up off the road -- in which it was claimed that "Padyatra, or foot—pilgrimage, 
is an ancient, pre— Islamic tradition of national culture, not imported 
property of Mughal immigrants." Also: "Purloining of this tradition by so- 
called Ayesha Bibiji is flagrant and deliberate inflammation of already 
sensitive situation." 

"There will be no trouble," the kahin broke her silence to announce. 



0 0 0 

Gibreel dreamed a suburb: 

As the Ayesha Haj neared Sarang, the outermost suburb of the great 
metropolis on the Arabian Sea towards which the visionary girl was leading 
them, journalists, politicos and police officers redoubled their visits. At first 
the policemen threatened to disband the march forcibly; the politicians, 
however, advised that this would look very like a sectarian act and could 
lead to outbreaks of communal violence from top to bottom of the country. 
Eventually the police chiefs agreed to permit the march, but groused 
menacingly about being "unable to guarantee safe passages" for the pilgrims. 
Mishal Akhtar said: "We are going on." 

The suburb of Sarang owed its relative affluence to the presence of 
substantial coal deposits nearby. It turned out that the coalminers of Sarang, 
men whose lives were spent boring pathways through the earth -- "parting" 
it, one might say — could not stomach the notion that a girl could do the 
same, with a wave of her hand, for the sea. Cadres of certain communalist 
groupings had been at work, inciting the miners to violence, and as a result 
of the activities of these agents provocateurs a mob was forming, carrying 
banners demanding: NO ISLAMIC PADYATRA! BUTTERFLY WITCH, GO HOME. 
On the night before they were due to enter Sarang, Mirza Saeed made 
another futile appeal to the pilgrims. "Give up," he implored uselessly. 
"Tomorrow we will all be killed." Ayesha whispered in Mishal's ear, and she 
spoke up: "Better a martyr than a coward. Are there any cowards here?" 
There was one. Sri Srinivas, explorer of the Grand Canyon, proprietor of a 
Toy Univas, whose motto was creativity and sinceriety, sided with Mirza 
Saeed. As a devout follower of the goddess Lakshmi, whose face was so 
perplexingly also Ayesha's, he felt unable to participate in the coming 
hostilities on either side. "I am a weak fellow," he confessed to Saeed. "I 
have loved Miss Ayesha, and a man should fight for what he loves; but, what 
to do, I require neutral status." Srinivas was the fifth member of the 
renegade society in the Mercedes-Benz, and now Mrs. Qureishi had no 
option but to share the back seat with a common man. Srinivas greeted her 
unhappily, and, seeing her bounce grumpily along the seat away from him, 
attempted to placate. "Please to accept a token of my esteem." — And 
produced, from an inside pocket, a Family Planning doll. 
That night the deserters remained in the station wagon while the faithful 
prayed in the open air. They had been allowed to camp in a disused goods 
train marshalling yard, guarded by military police. Mirza Saeed couldn't 
sleep. He was thinking about something Srinivas had said to him, about 
being a Gandhian in his head, "but I'm too weak to put such notions into 
practice. Excuse me, but it's true. I was not cut out for suffering, Sethji. I 
should have stayed with wife and kiddies and cut out this adventure disease 
that has made me land up in such a place." 



In my family, too, Mirza Saeed in his insomnia answered the sleeping toy 
merchant, we have suffered from a kind of disease: one of detachment, of 
being unable to connect ourselves to things, events, feelings. Most people 
define themselves by their work, or where they come from, or suchlike; we 
have lived too far inside our heads. It makes actuality damn hard to handle. 
Which was to say that he found it hard to believe that all this was really 
happening; but it was. 

ooo 

When the Ayesha Pilgrims were ready to set off the next morning, the huge 
clouds of butterflies that had travelled with them all the way from Titlipur 
suddenly broke up and vanished from view, revealing that the sky was filling 
up with other, more prosaic clouds. Even the creatures that had been 
clothing Ayesha -- the elite corps, so to speak -- decamped, and she had to 
lead the procession dressed in the mundanity of an old cotton sari with a 
block-printed hem of leaves. The disappearance of the miracle that had 
seemed to validate their pilgrimage depressed all the marchers; so that in 
spite of all Mishal Akhtar's exhortations they were unable to sing as they 
moved forwards, deprived of the benediction of the butterflies, to meet their 
fate. 

ooo 

The No Islamic Padyatra street mob had prepared a welcome for Ayesha in a 
street lined on both sides with the shacks of bicycle repairers. They had 
blocked the pilgrims' routes with dead bicycles, and waited behind this 
barricade of broken wheels, bent handlebars and silenced bells as the 
Ayesha Haj entered the northern sector of the street. Ayesha walked 
towards the mob as if it did not exist, and when she reached the last 
crossroads, beyond which the clubs and knives of the enemy awaited her, 
there was a thunderclap like the trumpet of doom and an ocean fell down 
out of the sky. The drought had broken too late to save the crops; 
afterwards many of the pilgrims believed that God had been saving up the 
water for just this purpose, letting it build up in the sky until it was as 
endless as the sea, sacrificing the year's harvest in order to save his 
prophetess and her people. 

The stunning force of the downpour unnerved both pilgrims and assailants. 
In the confusion of the flood a second doomtrumpet was heard. This was, in 
point of fact, the horn of Mirza Saeed's Mercedes-Benz station wagon, which 
he had driven at high speed through the suffocating side gullies of the 
suburb, bringing down racks of shirts hanging on rails, and pumpkin barrows, 
and trays of cheap plastic notions, until he reached the street of basket- 
worker that intersected the street of bicycle repairers just to the north of 
the barricade. Here he accelerated as hard as he could and charged towards 
the crossroads, scattering pedestrians and wickerwork stools in all directions. 
He reached the crossroads immediately after the sea fell out of the sky, and 
braked violently. Sri Srinivas and Osman leaped out, seized Mishal Akhtar 



and the prophetess Ayesha, and hauled them into the Mercedes in a flurry of 
legs, sputum and abuse. Saeed accelerated away from the scene before 
anybody had managed to get the blinding water out of their eyes. 
Inside the car: bodies heaped in an angry jumble. Mishal Akhtar shouted 
abuse at her husband from the bottom of the pile: "Saboteur! Traitor! Scum 
from somewhere! Mule!" -- To which Saeed sarcastically replied, "Martyrdom 
is too easy, Mishal. Don't you want to watch the ocean open, like a flower?" 
And Mrs. Qureishi, sticking her head out through Osman's inverted legs, 
added in a pink-faced gasp: "Okay, come on, Mishu, quit. We meant well." 

ooo 

Gibreel dreamed a flood: 

When the rains came, the miners of Sarang had been waiting for the 
pilgrims with their pickaxes in their hands, but when the bicycle barricade 
was swept away they could not avoid the idea that God had taken Ayesha's 
side. The town's drainage system surrendered instantly to the overwhelming 
assault of the water, and the miners were soon standing in a muddy flood 
that reached as high as their waists. Some of them tried to move towards 
the pilgrims, who also continued to make efforts to advance. But now the 
rainstorm redoubled its force, and then doubled it again, falling from the sky 
in thick slabs through which it was getting difficult to breathe, as though the 
earth were being engulfed, and the firmament above were reuniting with the 
firmament below. 

Gibreel, dreaming, found his vision obscured by water. 

ooo 

The rain stopped, and a watery sun shone down on a Venetian scene of 
devastation. The roads of Sarang were now canals, along which there 
journeyed all manner of flotsam. Where only recently scooter—rickshaws, 
camel—carts and repaired bicycles had gone, there now floated newspapers, 
flowers, bangles, watermelons, umbrellas, chappals, sunglasses, baskets, 
excrement, medicine bottles, playing cards, dupattas, pancakes, lamps. The 
water had an odd, reddish tint that made the sodden populace imagine that 
the street was flowing with blood. There was no trace of bully-boy miners or 
of Ayesha Pilgrims. A dog swam across the intersection by the collapsed 
bicycle barricade, and all around there lay the damp silence of the flood, 
whose waters lapped at marooned buses, while children stared from the 
roofs of deliquescent gullies, too shocked to come out and play. 
Then the butterflies returned. 

From nowhere, as if they had been hiding behind the sun; and to celebrate 
the end of the rain they had all taken the colour of sunlight. The 



arrival of this immense carpet of light in the sky utterly bewildered the 
people of Sarang, who were already reeling in the aftermath of the storm; 
fearing the apocalypse, they hid indoors and closed their shutters. On a 
nearby hillside, however, Mirza Saeed Akhtar and his party observed the 
miracle's return and were filled, all of them, even the zamindar, with a kind 
of awe. 

Mirza Saeed had driven hell-for--leather, in spite of being half-- blinded by 
the rain which poured through the smashed windscreen, until on a road that 
led up and around the bend of a hill he came to a halt at the gates of the No. 
i Sarang Coalfield. The pitheads were dimly visible through the rain. 
"Brainbox," Mishal Akhtar cursed him weakly. "Those bums are waiting for 
us back there, and you drive us up here to see their pals. Tip-top notion, 
Saeed. Extra fine." 

But they had no more trouble from miners. That was the day of the mining 
disaster that left fifteen thousand pitmen buried alive beneath the Sarangi 
hill. Saeed, Mishal, the Sarpanch, Osman, Mrs. Qureishi, Srinivas and 
Ayesha stood exhausted and soaked to the skin by the roadside as 
ambulances, fire—engines, salvage operators and pit bosses arrived in large 
quantities and left, much later, shaking their heads. The Sarpanch caught his 
earlobes between thumbs and forefingers. "Life is pain," he said. "Life is pain 
and loss; it is a coin of no value, worth even less than a kauri or a dam." 
Osman of the dead bullock, who, like the Sarpanch, had lost a dearly loved 
companion during the pilgrimage, also wept. Mrs. Qureishi attempted to look 
on the bright side: "Main thing is that we're okay," but this got no response. 
Then Ayesha closed her eyes and recited in the sing—song voice of prophecy, 
"It is a judgment upon them for the bad attempt they made." 
Mirza Saeed was angry. "They weren't at the bloody barricade," he shouted. 
"They were working under the goddamned ground." 
"They dug their own graves," Ayesha replied. 

ooo 

This was when they sighted the returning butterflies. Saeed watched the 
golden cloud in disbelief, as it first gathered and then sent out streams of 
winged light in every direction. Ayesha wanted to return to the crossroads. 
Saeed objected: "It's flooded down there. Our only chance is to drive down 
the opposite side of this hill and come out the other side of town." But 
Ayesha and Mishal had already started back; the prophetess was supporting 
the other, ashen woman, holding her around the waist. 
"Mishal, for God's sake," Mirza Saeed called after his wife. "For the love of 
God. What will I do with the motor-car?" 

But she went on down the hill, towards the flood, leaning heavily on Ayesha 
the seer, without looking round. 

This was how Mirza Saeed Akhtar came to abandon his beloved Mercedes- 
Benz station wagon near the entrance to the drowned mines of Sarang, and 
join in the foot-pilgrimage to the Arabian Sea. 



The seven bedraggled travellers stood thigh— deep in water at the 
intersection of the street of bicycle repairers and the alley of the basket- 
weavers. Slowly, slowly, the water had begun to go down. "Face it," Mirza 
Saeed argued. "The pilgrimage is finished. The villagers are who knows 
where, maybe drowned, possibly murdered, certainly lost. There's nobody 
left to follow you but us." He stuck his face into Ayesha's. "So forget it, sister; 
you're sunk." 
"Look," Mishal said. 

From all sides, out of the little tinkers' gullies, the villagers of Titlipur were 
returning to the place of their dispersal. They were all coated from neck to 
ankles in golden butterflies, and long lines of the little creatures went before 
them, like ropes drawing them to safety out of a well. The people of Sarang 
watched in terror from their windows, and as the waters of retribution 
receded, the Ayesha Haj re-formed in the middle of the road. 
"I don't believe it," said Mirza Saeed. 

But it was true. Every single member of the pilgrimage had been tracked 
down by the butterflies and brought back to thF main road. And stranger 
claims were later made: that when the creatures had settled on a broken 
ankle the injury had healed, or that an open wound had closed as if by 
magic. Many marchers said they had awoken from unconsciousness to find 
the butterflies fluttering about their lips. Some even believed that they had 
been dead, drowned, and that the butterflies had brought them back to life. 
"Don't be stupid," Mirza Saeed cried. "The storm saved you; it washed away 
your enemies, so it's not surprising few of you are hurt. Let's be scientific, 
please." 

"Use your eyes, Saeed," Mishal told him, indicating the presence before 
them of over a hundred men, women and children enveloped in glowing 
butterflies. "What does your science say about this?" 

ooo 

In the last days of the pilgrimage, the city was all around them. Officers 
from the Municipal Corporation met with Mishal and Ayesha and planned a 
route through the metropolis. On this route were mosques in which the 
pilgrims could sleep without clogging up the streets. Excitement in the city 
was intense: each day, when the pilgrims set off towards their next resting- 
place, they were watched by enormous crowds, some sneering and hostile, 
but many bringing presents of sweetmeats, medicines and food. 
Mirza Saeed, worn-out and filthy, was in a state of deep frustration on 
account of his failure to convince more than a handful of the pilgrims that it 
was better to put one's trust in reason than in miracles. Miracles had been 
doing pretty well for them, the Titlipur villagers pointed out, reasonably 
enough. "Those blasted butterflies," Saeed muttered to the Sarpanch. 
"Without them, we'd have a chance." 

"But they have been with us from the start," the Sarpanch replied with a 
shrug. 



Mishal Akhtar was clearly close to death; she had begun to smell of it, and 
had turned a chalky white colour that frightened Saeed badly. But Mishal 
wouldn't let him come near her. She had ostracized her mother, too, and 
when her father took time off from banking to visit her on the pilgrimage's 
first night in a city mosque, she told him to buzz off. "Things have come to 
the point," she announced, "where only the pure can be with the pure." 
When Mirza Saeed heard the diction of Ayesha the prophetess emerging 
from his wife's mouth he lost all but the tiniest speck of hope. 
Friday came, and Ayesha agreed that the pilgrimage could halt for a day to 
participate in the Friday prayers. Mirza Saeed, who had forgotten almost all 
the Arabic verses that had once been stuffed into him by rote, and could 
scarcely remember when to stand with his hands held in front of him like a 
book, when to genuflect, when to press his forehead to the ground, 
stumbled through the ceremony with growing self-disgust. At the end of the 
prayers, however, something happened that stopped the Ayesha Haj in its 
tracks. 

As the pilgrims watched the congregation leaving the courtyard of the 
mosque, a commotion began outside the main gate. Mirza Saeed went to 
investigate. "What's the hoo--hah?" he asked as he struggled through the 
crowd on the mosque steps; then he saw the basket sitting on the bottom 
step. -- And heard, rising from the basket, the baby's cry. 
The foundling was perhaps two weeks old, clearly illegitimate, and it was 
equally plain that its options in life were limited. The crowd was in a doubtful, 
confused mood. Then the mosque's Imam appeared at the head of the flight 
of steps, and beside him was Ayesha the seer, whose fame had spread 
throughout the city. 

The crowd parted like the sea, and Ayesha and the Imam came down to the 
basket. The Imam examined the baby briefly; rose; and turned to address 
the crowd. 

"This child was born in devilment," he said. "It is the Devil's child." He was a 
young man. 

The mood of the crowd shifted towards anger. Mirza Saeed Akhtar shouted 
out: "You, Ayesha, kahin. What do you say?" 
"Everything will be asked of us," she replied. 

The crowd, needing no clearer invitation, stoned the baby to death. 

ooo 

After that the Ayesha Pilgrims refused to move on. The death of the 
foundling had created an atmosphere of mutiny among the weary villagers, 
none of whom had lifted or thrown a stone. Mishal, snow-white now, was too 
enfeebled by her illness to rally the marchers; Ayesha, as ever, refused to 
dispute. "If you turn your backs on God," she warned the villagers, "don't be 
surprised when he does the same to you." 

The pilgrims were squatting in a group in a corner of the large mosque, 
which was painted lime-green on the outside and bright blue within, and lit, 



when necessary, by multicoloured neon "tube lights". After Ayesha's warning 
they turned their backs on her and huddled closer together, although the 
weather was warm and humid enough. Mirza Saeed, spotting his opportunity, 
decided to challenge Ayesha directly once again. "Tell me," he asked sweetly, 
"how exactly does the angel give you all this information? You never tell us 
his precise words, only your interpretations of them. Why such indirection? 
Why not simply quote?" 

"He speaks to me," Ayesha answered, "in clear and memorable forms." 
Mirza Saeed, full of the bitter energy of his desire for her, and the pain of his 
estrangement from his dying wife, and the memory of the tribulations of the 
march, smelled in her reticence the weakness he had been probing for. 
"Kindly be more specific," he insisted. "Or why should anyone believe? What 
are these forms?" 

"The archangel sings to me," she admitted, "to the tunes of popular hit 
songs." 

Mirza Saeed Akhtar clapped his hands delightedly and began to laugh the 
loud, echoing laughter of revenge, and Osman the bullock-boy joined in, 
beating on his dholki and prancing around the squatting villagers, singing 
the latest filmi ganas and making nautch— girl eyes. "Hoji!" he carolled. "This 
is how Gibreel recites, ho ji! Ho ji!" 

And one after the other, pilgrim after pilgrim rose and joined in the dance of 
the circling drummer, dancing their disillusion and disgust in the courtyard of 
the mosque, until the Imam came running to shriek at the ungodliness of 
their deeds. 

ooo 

Night fell. The villagers of Titlipur were grouped around their Sarpanch, 
Muhammad Din, and serious talks about returning to Titlipur were under way. 
Perhaps a little of the harvest could be saved. Mishal Akhtar lay dying with 
her head in her mother's lap, racked by pain, with a single tear emerging 
from her left eye. And in a far corner of the courtyard of the greenblue 
mosque with its technicolour tube-lighting, the visionary and the zamindar 
sat alone and talked. A moon — new, horned, cold — shone down. 
"You're a clever man," Ayesha said. "You knew how to take your chance." 
This was when Mirza Saeed made his offer of a compromise. "My wife is 
dying," he said. "And she wants very much to go to Mecca Sharif. So we 
have interests in common, you and I." 

Ayesha listened. Saeed pressed on: "Ayesha, I'm not a bad man. Let me tell 
you, I've been damn impressed by many things on this walk; damn 
impressed. You have given these people a profound spiritual experience, no 
question. Don't think we modern types lack a spiritual dimension." 
"The people have left me," Ayesha said. 

"The people are confused," Saeed replied. "Point is, if you actually take them 
to the sea and then nothing happens, my God, they really could turn against 
you. So here's the deal. I gave a tinkle to Mishal's papa and he agreed to 



underwrite half the cost. We propose to fly you and Mishal, and let's say ten 
-- twelve! -- of the villagers, to Mecca, within forty-eight hours, personally. 
Reservations are available. We leave it to you to select the individuals best 
suited to the trip. Then, truly, you will have performed a miracle for some 
instead of for none. And in my view the pilgrimage itself has been a miracle, 
in a way. So you will have done very much." 
He held his breath. 

"I must think," Ayesha said. "Think, think," Saeed encouraged her happily. 
"Ask your archangel. If he agrees, it must be right." 

ooo 

Mirza Saeed Akhtar knew that when Ayesha announced that the Archangel 
Gibreel had accepted his offer her power would be destroyed forever, 
because the villagers would perceive her fraudulence and her desperation, 
too. -- But how could she turn him down? -- What choice did she really have? 
"Revenge is sweet," he told himself. Once the woman was discredited, he 
would certainly take Mishal to Mecca, if that were still her wish. 
The butterflies of Titlipur had not entered the mosque. They lined its exterior 
walls and onion dome, glowing greenly in the dark. 

Ayesha in the night: stalking the shadows, lying down, rising to go on the 
prowl again. There was an uncertainty about her; then the slowness came, 
and she seemed to dissolve into the shadows of the mosque. She returned 
at dawn. 

After the morning prayer she asked the pilgrims if she might address them; 
and they, doubtfully, agreed. 

"Last night the angel did not sing," she said. "He told me, instead, about 

doubt, and how the Devil makes use of it. I said, but they doubt me, what 

can I do? He answered: only proof can silence doubt." 

She had their full attention. Next she told them what Mirza Saeed had 

suggested in the night. "He told me to go and ask my angel, but I know 

better," she cried. "How could I choose between you? It is all of us, or 

none." 

"Why should we follow you," the Sarpanch asked, "after all the dying, the 
baby, and all?" 

"Because when the waters part, you will be saved. You will enter into the 
Glory of the Most High." 

"What waters?" Mirza Saeed yelled. "How will they divide?" 

"Follow me," Ayesha concluded, "and judge me by their parting." 

His offer had contained an old question: _What kind of idea are you?_ And 

she, in turn, had offered him an old answer. _I was tempted, but am 

renewed; am uncompromising; absolute; pure_. 

ooo 

The tide was in when the Ayesha Pilgrimage marched down an alley beside 
the Holiday Inn, whose windows were full of the mistresses of film stars 
using their new Polaroid cameras, -- when the pilgrims felt the city's asphalt 



turn gritty and soften into sand, -- when they found themselves walking 
through a thick mulch of rotting coconuts abandoned cigarette packets pony 
turds non-degradable bottles fruit peelings jellyfish and paper, -- on to the 
mid-brown sand overhung by high leaning cocopalms and the balconies of 
luxury sea-view apartment blocks, -- past the teams of young men whose 
muscles were so well-honed that they looked like deformities, and who were 
performing gymnastic contortions of all sorts, in unison, like a murderous 
army of ballet dancers, -- and through the beachcombers, clubmen and 
families who had come to take the air or make business contacts or 
scavenge a living from the sand, -- and gazed, for the first time in their lives, 
upon the Arabian Sea. 

Mirza Saeed saw Mishal, who was being supported by two of the village men, 
because she was no longer strong enough to stand up by herself. Ayesha 
was beside her, and Saeed had the idea that the prophetess had somehow 
stepped out of the dying woman, that all the brightness of Mishal had 
hopped out of her body and taken this mythological shape, leaving a husk 
behind to die. Then he was angry with himself for allowing Ayesha's 
supernaturalism to infect him, too. 

The villagers of Titlipur had agreed to follow Ayesha after a long discussion 
in which they had asked her not to take part. Their common sense told them 
that it would be foolish to turn back when they had come so far and were in 
sight of their first goal; but the new doubts in their minds sapped their 
strength. It was as if they were emerging from some Shangri-La of Ayesha's 
making, because now that they were simply walking behind her rather than 
following her in the true sense, they seemed to age and sicken with every 
step they took. By the time they saw the sea they were a lame, tottering, 
rheumy, feverish, red-eyed bunch, and Mirza Saeed wondered how many of 
them would manage the final few yards to the water's edge. 
The butterflies were with them, high over their heads. 
"What now, Ayesha?" Saeed called out to her, filled with the horrible notion 
that his beloved wife might die here under the hoofs of ponies for rent and 
beneath the eyes of sugarcane-juice vendors. "You have brought us all to 
the edges of extinction, but here is an unquestionable fact: the sea. Where 
is your angel now?" 

She climbed up, with the villagers' help, on to an unused thela lying next to 
a soft--drink stall, and didn't answer Saeed until she could look down at him 
from her new perch. "Gibreel says the sea is like our souls. When we open 
them, we can move through into wisdom. If we can open our hearts, we can 
open the sea." 

"Partition was quite a disaster here on land," he taunted her. "Quite a few 
guys died, you might remember. You think it will be different in the water?" 
"Shh," said Ayesha suddenly. "The angel's almost here." 
It was, on the face of it, surprising that after all the attention the march had 
received the crowd at the beach was no better than moderate; but the 



authorities had taken many precautions, closing roads, diverting traffic; so 
there were perhaps two hundred gawpers on the beach. Nothing to worry 
about. 

What _was_ strange was that the spectators did not see the butterflies, or 
what they did next. But Mirza Saeed clearly observed the great glowing 
cloud fly out over the sea; pause; hover; and form itself into the shape of a 
colossal being, a radiant giant constructed wholly of tiny beating wings, 
stretching from horizon to horizon, filling the sky. 

"The angel!" Ayesha called to the pilgrims. "Now you see! He's been with us 
all the way. Do you believe me now?" Mirza Saeed saw absolute faith return 
to the pilgrims. "Yes," they wept, begging her forgiveness. "Gibreel! Gibreel! 
Ya Allah." 

Mirza Saeed made his last effort. "Clouds take many shapes," he shouted. 
"Elephants, film stars, anything. Look, it's changing even now." But nobody 
paid any attention to him; they were watching, full of amazement, as the 
butterflies dived into the sea. 

The villagers were shouting and dancing for joy. "The parting! The parting!" 
they cried. Bystanders called out to Mirza Saeed: "Hey, mister, what are 
they getting so fired up about? We can't see anything going on." 
Ayesha had begun to walk towards the water, and Mishal was being dragged 
along by her two helpers. Saeed ran to her and began to struggle with the 
village men. "Let go of my wife. At once! Damn you! I am your zamindar. 
Release her; remove your filthy hands!" But Mishal whispered: "They won't. 
Go away, Saeed. You are closed. The sea only opens for those who are 
open." 

"Mishal!" he screamed, but her feet were already wet. 
Once Ayesha had entered the water the villagers began to run. Those who 
could not leapt upon the backs of those who could. Holding their babies, the 
mothers of Titlipur rushed into the sea; grandsons bore their grandmothers 
on their shoulders and rushed into the waves. Within minutes the entire 
village was in the water, splashing about, falling over, getting up, moving 
steadily forwards, towards the horizon, never looking back to shore. Mirza 
Saeed was in the water, too. "Come back," he beseeched his wife. "Nothing 
is happening; come back." 

At the water's edge stood Mrs. Qureishi, Osman, the Sarpanch, Sri Srinivas. 
Mishal's mother was sobbing operatically: "O my baby, my baby. What will 
become?" Osman said: "When it becomes clear that miracles don't happen, 
they will turn back." "And the butterflies?" Srinivas asked him, querulously. 
"What were they? An accident?" 

It dawned on them that the villagers were not coming back. "They must be 
nearly out of their depth," the Sarpanch said. "How many of them can 
swim?" asked blubbering Mrs. Qureishi. "Swim?" shouted Srinivas. "Since 
when can village folk swim?" They were all screaming at one another as if 
they were miles apart, jumping from foot to foot, their bodies willing them to 



enter the water, to do something. They looked as if they were dancing on a 
fire. The incharge of the police squad that had been sent down for crowd 
control purposes came up as Saeed came running out of the water. 
"What is befalling?" the officer asked. "What is the agitation?" 
"Stop them," Mirza Saeed panted, pointing out to sea. 
"Are they miscreants?" the policeman asked. 
"They are going to die," Saeed replied. 

It was too late. The villagers, whose heads could be seen bobbing about in 
the distance, had reached the edge of the underwater shelf. Almost all 
together, making no visible attempt to save themselves, they dropped 
beneath the water's surface. In moments, every one of the Ayesha Pilgrims 
had sunk out of sight. 

None of them reappeared. Not a single gasping head or thrashing arm. 
Saeed, Osman, Srinivas, the Sarpanch, and even fat Mrs. Qureishi ran into 
the water, shrieking: "God have mercy; come on, everybody, help." 
Human beings in danger of drowning struggle against the water. It is against 
human nature simply to walk forwards meekly until the sea swallows you up. 
But Ayesha, Mishal Akhtar and the villagers of Titlipur subsided below sea- 
level; and were never seen again. 

Mrs. Qureishi was pulled to shore by policemen, her face blue, her lungs full 
of water, and needed the kiss of life. Osman, Srinivas and the Sarpanch 
were dragged out soon afterwards. Only Mirza Saeed Akhtar continued to 
dive, further and further out to sea, staying under for longer and longer 
periods; until he, too, was rescued from the Arabian Sea, spent, sick and 
fainting. The pilgrimage was over. 

Mirza Saeed awoke in a hospital ward to find a CID man by his bedside. The 
authorities were considering the feasibility of charging the survivors of the 
Ayesha expedition with attempted illegal emigration, and detectives had 
been instructed to get down their stories before they had had a chance to 
confer. This was the testimony of the Sarpanch of Titlipur, Muhammad Din: 
"Just when my strength had failed and I thought I would surely die there in 
the water, I saw it with my own eyes; I saw the sea divide, like hair being 
combed; and they were all there, far away, walking away from me. She was 
there also, my wife, Khadija, whom I loved." 

This is what Osman the bullock-boy told the detectives, who had been badly 
shaken by the Sarpanch's deposition: "At first I was in great fear of 
drowning myself. Still, I was searching searching, mainly for her, Ayesha, 
whom I knew from before her alteration. And just at the last, I saw it 
happen, the marvellous thing. The water opened, and I saw them go along 
the oceanfloor, among the dying fish." 

Sri Srinivas, too, swore by the goddess Lakshmi that he had seen the 
parting of the Arabian Sea; and by the time the detectives got to Mrs. 
Qureishi, they were utterly unnerved, because they knew that it was 
impossible for the men to have cooked up the story together. Mishal's 



mother, the wife of the great banker, told the same story in her own words. 
"Believe don't believe," she finished emphatically, "but what my eyes have 
seen my tongue repeats." 

Goosepimply CID men attempted the third degree: "Listen, Sarpanch, don't 
shit from your mouth. So many were there, nobody saw these things. 
Already the drowned bodies are floating to shore, swollen like balloons and 
stinking like hell. If you go on lying we will take you and stick your nose in 
the truth." 

"You can show me whatever you want," Sarpanch Muhammad Din told his 
interrogators. "But I still saw what I saw." 

"And you?" the CID men assembled, once he awoke, to ask Mirza Saeed 
Akhtar. "What did you see at the beach?" 

"How can you ask?" he protested. "My wife has drowned. Don't come 
hammering with your questions." 

When he found out that he was the only survivor of the Ayesha Haj not to 
have witnessed the parting of the waves -- Sri Srinivas was the one who told 
him what the others saw, adding mournfully: "It is our shame that we were 
not thought worthy to accompany. On us, Sethji, the waters closed, they 
slammed in our faces like the gates of Paradise" -- Mirza Saeed broke down 
and wept for a week and a day, the dry sobs continuing to shake his body 
long after his tear ducts had run out of salt. 
Then he went home. 

ooo 

Moths had eaten the punkahs of Peristan and the library had been consumed 
by a billion hungry worms. When he turned on the taps, snakes oozed out 
instead of water, and creepers had twined themselves around the four- 
poster bed in which Viceroys had once slept. It was as if time had 
accelerated in his absence, and centuries had somehow elapsed instead of 
months, so that when he touched the giant Persian carpet rolled up in the 
ballroom it crumbled under his hand, and the baths were full of frogs with 
scarlet eyes. At night there were jackals howling on the wind. The great tree 
was dead, or close to death, and the fields were barren as the desert; the 
gardens of Peristan, in which, long ago, he first saw a beautiful young girl, 
had long ago yellowed into ugliness. Vultures were the only birds in the sky. 
He pulled a rocking-chair out on to his veranda, sat down, and rocked 
himself gently to sleep. 

Once, only once, he visited the tree. The village had crumbled into dust; 
landless peasants and looters had tried to seize the abandoned land, but the 
drought had driven them away. There had been no rain here. Mirza Saeed 
returned to Peristan and padlocked the rusty gates. He was not interested in 
the fate of his fellow-survivors; he went to the telephone and ripped it out of 
the wall. 

After an uncounted passage of days it occurred to him that he was starving 
to death, because he could smell his body reeking of nail-varnish remover; 



but as he felt neither hungry nor thirsty, he decided there was no point 
bothering to find food. For what? Much better to rock in this chair, and not 
think, not think, not think. 

On the last night of his life he heard a noise like a giant crushing a forest 
beneath his feet, and smelled a stench like the giant's fart, and he realized 
that the tree was burning. He got out of his chair and staggered dizzily down 
to the garden to watch the fire, whose flames were consuming histories, 
memories, genealogies, purifying the earth, and coming towards him to set 
him free; -- because the wind was blowing the fire towards the grounds of 
the mansion, so soon enough, soon enough, it would be his turn. He saw the 
tree explode into a thousand fragments, and the trunk crack, like a heart; 
then he turned away and reeled towards the place in the garden where 
Ayesha had first caught his eye; -- and now he felt a slowness come upon 
him, a great heaviness, and he lay down on the withered dust. Before his 
eyes closed he felt something brushing at his lips, and saw the little cluster 
of butterflies struggling to enter his mouth. Then the sea poured over him, 
and he was in the water beside Ayesha, who had stepped miraculously out of 
his wife's body . .. "Open," she was crying. "Open wide!" Tentacles of light 
were flowing from her navel and he chopped at them, chopped, using the 
side of his hand. "Open," she screamed. "You've come this far, now do the 
rest." -- How could he hear her voice? -- They were under water, lost in the 
roaring of the sea, but he could hear her clearly, they could all hear her, that 
voice like a bell. "Open," she said. He closed. 

He was a fortress with clanging gates. -- He was drowning. -- She was 
drowning, too. He saw the water fill her mouth, heard it begin to gurgle into 
her lungs. Then something within him refused that, made a different choice, 
and at the instant that his heart broke, he opened. 
His body split apart from his adam"s-apple to his groin, so that she could 
reach deep within him, and now she was open, they all were, and at the 
moment of their opening the waters parted, and they walked to Mecca 
across the bed of the Arabian Sea. 



IX A Wonderful Lamp 



1 

Eighteen months after his heart attack, Saladin Chamcha took to the air 
again in response to the telegraphed news that his father was in the 
terminal stages of multiple myeloma, a systemic cancer of the bone marrow 
that was "one hundred per cent fatal", as Chamcha's GP unsentimentally put 
it when he telephoned her to check. There had been no real contact between 
father and son since Changez Chamchawala sent Saladin the proceeds from 
his felled walnut—tree all those eternities ago. Saladin had sent a brief note 
reporting that he had survived the _Bostan_ disaster, and had been sent an 
even terser missive in return: "Rec.'d yr. communication. This information 
already to hand." When the bad news telegram arrived, however -- the 
signatory was the unknown second wife, Nasreen II, and the tone was pretty 
unvarnished: FATHER GOING FAST + IF DESIROUS OF SEEING BETTER 
MOVE IT + N CHAMCHAWALA (MRS) -- he discovered to his surprise that 
after a lifetime of tangled relationships with his father, after long years of 
crossed wires and "irrevocable sunderings", he was once again capable of an 
uncomplicated reaction. Simply, overwhelmingly, it was imperative that he 
reach Bombay before Changez left it for good. 

He spent the best part of a day first standing in the visa queue at the 
consular section of India House, and then trying to persuade a jaded official 
of the urgency of his application. He had stupidly forgotten to bring the 
telegram, and was told, as a result, that "it is issue of proof. You see, 
anybody could come and tell that their father is dying, isn't it? In order to 
expedite." Chamcha fought to restrain his anger, but finally burst. "Do I look 
like a Khalistan zealot to you?" The official shrugged. "I'll tell you who I am," 
Chamcha bellowed, incensed by that shrug, "I'm the poor bastard who got 
blown up by terrorists, fell thirty thousand feet out of the sky because of 
terrorists, and now because of those same terrorists I have to be insulted by 
pen-pushers like you." His visa application, placed firmly at the bottom of a 
large pile by his adversary, was not granted until three days later. The first 
available flight was thirty—six hours after that: and it was an Air India 747, 
and its name was _Gulistan_. 

Gulistan and Bostan, the twin gardens of Paradise -- one blew apart, and 
then there was one... Chamcha, moving down one of the drains through 
which Terminal Three dripped passengers into aircraft, saw the name 
painted next to the 747's open door, and turned a couple of shades paler. 
Then he heard the sari-clad Indian stewardess greeting him in an 
unmistakably Canadian accent, and lost his nerve, spinning away from the 
plane in a reflex of straightforward terror. As he stood there, facing the 
irritable throng of passengers waiting to board, he was conscious of how 



absurd he must look, with his brown leather holdall in one hand, two 
zippered suit-hanger bags in the other, and his eyes out on stalks; but for a 
long moment he was entirely unable to move. The crowd grew restive; _if 
this is an artery_, he found himself thinking, _then I'm the blasted clot_. "I 
used to chichi chicken out also," said a cheerful voice. "But now I've got the 
titrick. I fafa flap my hands during tatake-off and the plane always mama 
makes it into the isk isk isky." 

ooo 

"Today the top gogo goddess is absolutely Lakshmi," Sisodia confided over 
whisky once they were safely aloft. (He had been as good as his word, 
flapping his arms wildly as _Gulistan_ rushed down the runway, and 
afterwards settled back contentedly in his seat, beaming modestly. 
"Wowoworks every time." They were both travelling in the 747's upper deck, 
reserved for business class non-smokers, and Sisodia had moved into the 
em-pty seat next to Chamcha like air filling a vacuum. "Call me Whisky," he 
insisted. "What lie lie line are you in? How mum much do you earn? How 
long you bibi been away? You know any women in town, or you want heh 
heh help?") Chamcha closed his eyes and fixed his thoughts on his father. 
The saddest thing, he realized, was that he could not remember a single 
happy day with Changez in his entire life as a man. And the most gladdening 
thing was the discovery that even the unforgivable crime of being one's 
father could be forgiven, after all, in the end. _Hang on_, he pleaded silently. 
_I'm coming as fast as I can_. "In these hihighly material times," Sisodia 
explained, "who else but goddess of wewealth? In Bombay the young 
businessmen are hoho holding all night poopoo pooja parties. Statue of 
Lakshmi presides, with hands tuturned out, and lightbulbs running down her 
fifi fingers, lighting in sequence, you get me, as if the wealth is paw paw 
pouring down her palms." On the cabin's movie screen a stewardess was 
demonstrating the various safety procedures. In a corner of the screen an 
inset male figure translated her into sign language. This was progress, 
Chamcha recognized. Film instead of human beings, a small increase in 
sophistication (the signing) and a large increase in cost. High technology at 
the service, ostensibly, of safety; while in reality air travel got daily more 
dangerous, the world's stock of aircraft was ageing and nobody could afford 
to renew it. Bits fell off planes every day, or so it seemed, and collisions and 
near--misses were also on the up. So the film was a kind of lie, because by 
existing it said: _Observe the lengths we'll go to for your security. We'll even 
make you a movie about it_. Style instead of substance, the image instead 
of the reality . . . "I'm planning a big bubudget picture about her," Sisodia 
said. "This is in strictest coco confidence. Maybe a Sridevi weewee wehicle, I 
hohope so. Now that Gibreel's comeback is flaw flaw flopping, she is number 
one supreme." 

Chamcha had heard that Gibreel Farishta had hit the comeback trail. His first 
film, _The Parting of the Arabian Sea_, had bombed badly; the special 



effects looked home-made, the girl in the central Ayesha role, a certain 
Pimple Billimoria, had been woefully inadequate, and Gibreel's own portrayal 
of the archangel had struck many critics as narcissistic and megalomaniac. 
The days when he could do no wrong were gone; his second feature, 
_Mahound_, had hit every imaginable religious reef, and sunk without trace. 
"You see, he chochose to go with other producers," Sisodia lamented. "The 
greegreed of the ista ista istar. With me the if if effects always work and the 
good tataste also you can take for gug, grunt, granted." Saladin Chamcha 
closed his eyes and leaned back in his seat. He had drunk his whisky too fast 
on account of his fear of flying, and his head had begun to spin. Sisodia 
appeared not to recall his past connection to Farishta, which was fine. That 
was where the connection belonged: in the past. "Shh shh Sridevi as 
Lakshmi," Sisodia sang out, not very confidentially. "Now that is sosolid gold. 
You are an ack actor. You should work back hohome. Call me. Maybe we can 
do bubusiness. This picture: solid pap pap _platinum_." 
Chamcha's head whirled. What strange meanings words were taking on. 
Only a few days ago that _back home_ would have rung false. But now his 
father was dying and old emotions were sending tentacles out to grasp him. 
Maybe his tongue was twisting again, sending his accent East along with the 
rest of him. He hardly dared open his mouth. 

Almost twenty years earlier, when the young and newly renamed Saladin 
was scratching a living on the margins of the London theatre, in order to 
maintain a safe distance from his father; and when Changez was retreating 
in other ways, becoming both reclusive and religious; back then, one day, 
out of the blue, the father had written to the son, offering him a house. The 
property was a rambling mansion in the hill-station of Solan. "The first 
property I ever owned," Changez wrote, "and so it is the first I am gifting to 
you." Saladin's instant reaction was to see the offer as a snare, a way of 
rejoining him to home, to the webs of his father's power; and when he 
learned that the Solan property had long ago been requisitioned by the 
Indian Government in return for a peppercorn rent, and that it had for many 
years been occupied by a boys' school, the gift stood revealed as a delusion 
as well. What did Chamcha care if the school were willing to treat him, on 
any visits he cared to make, as a visiting Head of State, putting on march-- 
pasts and gymnastic displays? That sort of thing appealed to Changez's 
enormous vanity, but Chamcha wanted none of it. The point was, the school 
wasn't budging; the gift was useless, and probably an administrative 
headache as well. He wrote to his father refusing the offer. It was the last 
time Changez Chamchawala tried to give him anything. _Home_ receded 
from the prodigal son. 

"I never forget a faface," Sisodia was saying. "You're mimi Mimi's friend. The 
_Bostan_ susurvivor. Knew it the moment I saw you papa panic at the gaga 
gate. Hope you're not feefeeling too baba bad." Saladin, his heart sinking, 
shook his head, no, I'm fine, honestly. Sisodia, gleaming, knee-like, winked 



hideously at a passing stewardess and summoned more whisky. "Such a 
shashame about Gibreel and his lady," Sisodia went on. "Such a nice name 
that she had, alia alia Alleluia. What a temper on that boy, what ajcajealous 
tata type. Hard for a momodern gaga girl. They bus bust up." Saladin 
retreated, once again, into a pretence of sleep. _I have only just recovered 
from the past. Go, go away_. 

He had formally declared his recovery complete only five weeks earlier, at 
the wedding of Mishal Sufyan and Hanif Johnson. After the death of her 
parents in the Shaandaar fire Mishal had been assailed by a terrible, illogical 
guilt that caused her mother to appear to her in dreams and admonish her: 
"If only you'd passed the fire extinguisher when I asked. If only you'd blown 
a little harder. But you never listen to what I say and your lungs are so 
cigarette- rotten that you could not blow out one candle let alone a burning 
house." Under the severe eye of her mother's ghost Mishal moved out of 
Hanif's apartment, took a room in a place with three other women, applied 
for and got Jumpy Joshi's old job at the sports centre, and fought the 
insurance companies until they paid up. Only when the Shaandaar was ready 
to reopen under her management did Hind Sufyan's ghost agree that it was 
time to be off to the after-life; whereupon Mishal telephoned Hanif and 
asked him to marry her. He was too surprised to reply, and had to pass the 
telephone to a colleague who explained that the cat had got Mr. Johnson's 
tongue, and accepted Mishal's offer on the dumbstruck lawyer's behalf. So 
everybody was recovering from the tragedy; even Anahita, who had been 
obliged to live with a stiflingly old-fashioned aunt, managed to look pleased 
at the wedding, perhaps because Mishal had promised her her own rooms in 
the renovated Shaandaar Hotel. Mishal had asked Saladin to be her chief 
witness in recognition of his attempt to save her parents' life, and on their 
way to the registry office in Pinkwalla's van (all charges against the DJ and 
his boss, John Maslama, had been dropped for lack of evidence) Chamcha 
told the bride: "Today feels like a new start for me, too; perhaps for all of 
us." In his own case there had been by-pass surgery, and the difficulty of 
coming to terms with so many deaths, and nightmare visions of being 
metamorphosed once more into some sort of suiphurous, cloven-hoof demon. 
He was also, for a time, professionally crippled by a shame so profound that, 
when clients finally did begin to book him once more and ask for one of his 
voices, for example the voice of a frozen pea or a glove-puppet packet of 
sausages, he felt the memory of his telephonic crimes welling up in his 
throat and strangling the impersonations at birth. At Mishal's wedding, 
however, he suddenly felt free. It was quite a ceremony, largely because the 
young couple could not refrain from kissing one another throughout the 
procedure, and had to be urged by the registrar (a pleasant young woman 
who also exhorted the guests not to drink too much that day if they planned 
to drive) to hurry up and get through the words before it was time for the 
next wedding party to arrive. Afterwards at the Shaandaar the kissing 



continued, the kisses becoming gradually longer and more explicit, until 
finally the guests had the feeling that they were intruding on a private 
moment, and slipped quietly away leaving Hanif and Mishal to enjoy a 
passion so engulfing that they did not even notice their friends' departure; 
they remained oblivious, too, of the small crowd of children that gathered 
outside the windows of the Shaandaar Cafe to watch them. Chamcha, the 
last guest to leave, did the newlyweds the favour of pulling down the blinds, 
much to the children's annoyance; and strolled off down the rebuilt High 
Street feeling so light on his feet that he actually gave a kind of 
embarrassed skip. 

Nothing is forever, he thought beyond closed eyelids somewhere over Asia 
Minor. Maybe unhappiness is the continuum through which a human life 
moves, and joy just a series of blips, of islands in the stream. Or if not 
unhappiness, then at least melancholy ... These broodings were interrupted 
by a lusty snore from the seat beside him. Mr. Sisodia, whisky-glass in hand, 
was asleep. 

The producer was evidently a hit with the stewardesses. They fussed around 
his sleeping person, detaching the glass from his fingers and removing it to 
a place of safety, spreading a blanket over his lower half, and trilling 
admiringly over his snoring head: "Doesn't he look poochie? Just a little 
cuteso, I swear!" Chamcha was reminded unexpectedly of the society ladies 
of Bombay patting him on the head during his mother's little soirees, and 
fought back tears of surprise. Sisodia actually looked faintly obscene; he had 
removed his spectacles before falling asleep, and their absence gave him an 
oddly naked appearance. To Chamcha's eyes he resembled nothing so much 
as an outsize Shiva lingam. Maybe that accounted for his popularity with the 
ladies. 

Flicking through the magazines and newspapers he was offered by the 
stewardesses, Saladin chanced upon an old acquaintance in trouble. Hal 
Valance's sanitized _Aliens Show_ had flopped badly in the United States 
and was being taken off the air. Worse still, his advertising agency and its 
subsidiaries had been swallowed by an American leviathan, and it was 
probable that Hal was on the way out, conquered by the transatlantic dragon 
he had set out to tame. It was hard to feel sorry for Valance, unemployed 
and down to his last few millions, abandoned by his beloved Mrs. Torture 
and her pals, relegated to the limbo reserved for fallen favourites, along with 
busted entrepreneur. -boffins and insiderdealing financiers and renegade ex- 
ministers; but Chamcha, flying to his father's deathbed, was in so 
heightened an emotional condition that he managed a valedictory lump in 
the throat even for wicked Hal. _At whose pool table_, he wondered vaguely, 
_is Baby playing now?_ 

In India, the war between men and women showed no sign of abating. In 
the _Indian Express_ he read an account of the latest "bride suicide". _The 
husband, Prajapati, is absconding_. On the next page, in the weekly small-- 



ad marriage market, the parents of young men still demanded, and the 
parents of young women proudly offered, brides of "wheatish" complexions. 
Chamcha remembered Zeeny's friend, the poet Bhupen Gandhi, speaking of 
such things with passionate bitterness. "How to accuse others of being 
prejudiced when our own hands are so dirty?" he had declaimed. "Many of 
you in Britain speak of victimization. Well. I have not been there, I don't 
know your situation, but in my personal experience I have never been able 
to feel comfortable about being described as a victim. In class terms, 
obviously, I am not. Even speaking culturally, you find here all the bigotries, 
all the procedures associated with oppressor groups. So while many Indians 
are undoubtedly oppressed, I don't think any of us are entitled to lay claim 
to such a glamorous position." 

"Trouble with Bhupen's radical critiques," Zeeny had remarked, "is that 
reactionaries like Salad baba here just love to lap them up." 
An armaments scandal was raging; had the Indian government paid 
kickbacks to middlemen, and then gone in for a cover-up? Vast sums of 
money were involved, the Prime Minister's credibility had been weakened, 
but Chamcha couldn't be bothered with any of it. He was staring at the fuzzy 
photograph, on an inside page, of indistinct, bloated shapes floating down- 
river in large numbers. In a north Indian town there had been a massacre of 
Muslims, and their corpses had been dumped in the water, where they 
awaited the ministrations of some twentieth—century Gaffer Hexam. There 
were hundreds of bodies, swollen and rancid; the stench seemed to rise off 
the page. And in Kashmir a once-popular Chief Minister who had "made an 
accommodation" with the Congress -- I had shoes hurled at him during the 
Eid prayers by irate groups of Islamic fundamentalists. Communalism, 
sectarian tension, was omnipresent: as if the gods were going to war. In the 
eternal struggle between the world's beauty and its cruelty, cruelty was 
gaining ground by the day. Sisodia's voice intruded on these morose 
thoughts. The producer had woken up to see the photograph from Meerut 
staring up from Chamcha's fold—out table. "Fact is," he said without any of 
his usual bonhomie, "religious fafaith, which encodes the highest ass ass 
aspirations of human race, is now, in our cocountry, the servant of lowest 
instincts, and gogo God is the creature of evil." 

KNOWN HISTORY SHEETERS RESPONSIBLE FOR KILLINGS, a government 
spokesman alleged, but "progressive elements" rejected this analysis. CITY 
CONSTABULARY CONTAMINATED BY COMMUNAL AGITATORS, the counter- 
argument suggested. HINDU NATIONALISTS RUN AMUCK. A political 
fortnightly contained a photograph of signboards that had been mounted 
outside the Juma Masjid in Old Delhi. The Imam, a loose-bellied man with 
cynical eyes, who could be found most mornings in his "garden" -- a red- 
earth-and-rubble waste land in the shadow of the mosque -- counting 
rupees donated by the faithful and rolling up each note individually, so that 
he seemed to be holding a handful of thin beedi-like cigarettes -- and who 



was no stranger to com-- munalist politics himself, was apparently 
determined that the Meerut horror should be turned to good account. 
_Quench the Fire under our Breast_, the signboards cried. _Salute with 

Reverence those who met Martyrdom from the Bullets of the Po I is . Also: 

_Alas! Alas! Alas! Awak the Prime Minister!_ And finally, the call to action: 
_Bandh will be observed_, and the date of the strike. 
"Bad days," Sisodia went on. "For the moomoo movies also TV and 
economics have Delhi Delhi deleterious effects." Then he cheered up as 
stewardesses approached. "I will confess to being a mem member of the 
mile high cluck cluck club," he said gaily within the attendants' hearing. "And 
you? Should I see what I can ficfic fix?" 

O, the dissociations of which the human mind is capable, marvelled Saladin 
gloomily. O, the conflicting selves jostling and joggling within these bags of 
skin. No wonder we are unable to remain focused on anything for very long; 
no wonder we invent remote-control channel-hopping devices. If we turned 
these instruments upon ourselves we'd discover more channels than a cable 
or satellite mogul ever dreamed of. . . He himself had found his thoughts 
straying, no matter how hard he tried to fix them on his father, towards the 
question of Miss Zeenat Vakil. He had wired ahead, informing her of his 
arrival; would she meet the flight? What might or might not happen between 
them? Had he, by leaving her, by not returning, by losing touch for a time, 
done the Unforgivable Thing? Was she -- he thought, and was shocked by 
the realization that it had simply not occurred to him earlier — married? In 
love? Involved? And as for himself: what did he really want? _I'II know when 
I see her_, he thought. The future, even when it was only a question- 
shrouded glimmer, would not be eclipsed by the past; even when death 
moved towards the centre of the stage, life went on fighting for equal rights. 
The flight passed without incident. 
Zeenat Vakil was not waiting at the airport. 

"Come along," Sisodia waved. "My car has come to pipi pick, so please to 
lelet me drop." 

ooo 

Thirty— five minutes later Saladin Chamcha was at Scandal Point, standing at 
the gates of childhood with holdall and suit-bags, looking at the imported 
video-controlled entry system. Antinarcotics slogans had been painted on 
the perimeter wall: DREAMS ALL DROWN/WHEN SUGAR IS BROWN. And: 
FUTURE IS BLACK/WHEN SUGAR IS BROWN. Courage, my old, he braced 
himself; and rang as directed, once, firmly, for attention. 

ooo 

In the luxuriant garden the stump of the felled walnut-tree caught his 
unquiet eye. They probably used it as a picnic table now, he mused bitterly. 
His father had always had a gift for the melodramatic, self-pitying gesture, 
and to eat his lunch off a surface which packed such an emotional wallop -- 
with, no doubt, many profound sighs between the large mouthfuls -- would 



be right in character. Was he going to camp up his death, too, Saladin 
wondered. What a grandstand play for sympathy the old bastard could make 
now! Anyone in the vicinity of a dying man was utterly at his mercy. Punches 
delivered from a deathbed left bruises that never faded. 
His stepmother emerged from the dying man's marbled mansion to greet 
Chamcha without a hint of rancour. "Salahuddin. Good you came. It will lift 
his spirit, and now it is his spirit that he must fight with, because his body is 
more or less kaput." She was perhaps six or seven years younger than 
Saladin's mother would have been, but out of the same birdlike mould. His 
large, expansive father had been remarkably consistent in these matters at 
least. "How long does he have?" Saladin asked. Nasreen was as undeceived 
as her telegram had suggested. "It could be any day." The myeloma was 
present throughout Changez's "long bones" -- the cancer had brought its 
own vocabulary to the house; one no longer spoke of _arms and legs_ -- 
and in his skull. Cancerous cells had even been detected in the blood around 
the bones. "We should have spotted it," Nasreen said, and Saladin began to 
feel the old lady's power, the force of will with which she was reining in her 
feelings. "His pronounced weight-loss these past two years. Also he has 
complained of aches and pains, for instance in the knees. You know how it is. 
With an old man, you blame .his age, you don't imagine that a vile, hideous 
disease." She stopped, needing to control her voice. Kasturba, the ex-ayah, 
had come out to join them in the garden. It turned out that her husband 
Vallabh had died almost a year earlier, of old age, in his sleep: a kinder 
death than the one now eating its way out of the body of his employer, the 
seducer of his wife. Kasturba was still dressing in Nasreen I's old, loud saris: 
today she had chosen one of the dizziest of the Op--Art black-and-white 
prints. She, too, greeted Saladin warmly: hugs kisses tears. "As for me," she 
sobbed, "I will never stop praying for a miracle while there is one breath left 
in his poor lungs." 

Nasreen II embraced Kasturba; each woman rested her head on the other's 
shoulder. The intimacy between the two women was spontaneous and 
untarnished by resentments; as if the proximity of death had washed away 
the quarrels and jealousies of life. The two old ladies comforted one another 
in the garden, each consoling the other for the imminent loss of the most 
precious of things: love. Or, rather: the beloved. "Come on," Nasreen finally 
said to Saladin. "He should see you, pronto." 

"Does he know?" Saladin asked. Nasreen answered evasively. "He is an 
intelligent man. He keeps asking, where has all the blood gone? He says, 
there are only two illnesses in which the blood vanishes like this. One is 
tuberculosis." But, Saladin pressed, he never actually speaks the word? 
Nasreen lowered her head. The word had not been spoken, either by 
Changez or in his presence. "Shouldn't he know?" Chamcha asked. "Doesn't 
a man have the right to prepare for his death?" He saw Nasreen's eyes blaze 
for an instant. _Who do you think you are to tell us our duty. You have 



sacrificed all rights_. Then they faded, and when she spoke her voice was 
level, unemotional, low. "Maybe you're correct." But Kasturba wailed: "No! 
How to tell him, poor man? It will break his heart." 

The cancer had thickened Changez's blood to the point at which his heart 
was having the greatest difficulty pumping it round his body. It had also 
polluted the bloodstream with alien bodies, platelets, that would attack any 
blood with which he was transfused, even blood of his own type. _So, even 
in this small way, I can't help him_, Saladin understood. Changez could 
easily die of these side-effects before the cancer did for him. If he did die 
from the cancer, the end would take the form either of pneumonia or of 
kidney failure; the doctors, knowing they could do nothing for him, had sent 
him home to wait for it. "Because myeloma is systemic, chemotherapy and 
radiation treatment are not used," Nasreen explained. "Only medicament is 
the drug Melphalan, which can in some cases prolong life, even for years. 
However, we are informed he is in the category which will not respond to 
Melphalan tablets." _But he has not been told_, Saladin's inner voices 
insisted. _And that's wrong, wrong, wrong_. "Still, a miracle has happened," 
Kasturba cried. "The doctors told that normally this is one of the most 
painful cancers; but your father is in no pain. If one prays, then sometimes a 
kindness is granted." It was on account of the freak absence of pain that the 
cancer had taken so long to diagnose; it had been spreading in Changez's 
body for at least two years. "I must see him now," Saladin gently asked. A 
bearer had taken his holdall and suit-bags indoors while they spoke; now, at 
last, he followed his garments indoors. 

The interior of the house was unchanged -- the generosity of the second 
Nasreen towards the memory of the first seemed boundless, at least during 
these days, the last on earth of their mutual spouse -- except that Nasreen 
II had moved in her collection of stuffed birds (hoopoes and rare parrots 
under glass belljars, a full-grown King Penguin in the marble-and-mosaic hall, 
its beak swarming with tiny red ants) and her cases of impaled butterflies. 
Saladin moved past this colourful gallery of dead wings towards his father's 
study -- Changez had insisted on vacating his bedroom and having a bed 
moved downstairs into that wood-panelled retreat full of rotting books, so 
that people didn't have to run up and down all day to look after him — and 
came, at last, to death's door. 

Early in life Changez Chamchawala had acquired the disconcerting knack of 
sleeping with his eyes wide open, "staying on guard", as he liked to say. 
Now, as Saladin quietly entered the room, the effect of those open grey eyes 
staring blindly at the ceiling was positively unnerving. For a moment Saladin 
thought he was too late; that Changez had died while he'd been chatting in 
the garden. Then the man on the bed emitted a series of small coughs, 
turned his head, and extended an uncertain arm. Saladin Chamcha went 
towards his father and bowed his head beneath the old man's caressing 
palm. 



0 0 0 

To fall in love with one's father after the long angry decades was a serene 
and beautiful feeling; a renewing, life-giving thing, Saladin wanted to say, 
but did not, because it sounded vampirish; as if by sucking this new life out 
of his father he was making room, in Changez's body, for death. Although he 
kept it quiet, however, Saladin felt hourly closer to many old, rejected selves, 
many alternative Saladins -- or rather Salahuddins -- which had split off 
from himself as he made his various life choices, but which had apparently 
continued to exist, perhaps in the parallel universes of quantum theory. 
Cancer had stripped Changez Chamchawala literally to the bone; his cheeks 
had collapsed into the hollows of the skull, and he had to place a foam- 
rubber pillow under his buttocks because of the atrophying of his flesh. But it 
had also stripped him of his faults, of all that had been domineering, 
tyrannical and cruel in him, so that the mischievous, loving and brilliant man 
beneath lay exposed, once again, for all to see. _If only he could have been 
this person all his life_, Saladin (who had begun to find the sound of his full, 
unEnglished name pleasing for the first time in twenty years) found himself 
wishing. How hard it was to find one's father just when one had no choice 
but to say goodbye. 

On the morning of his return Salahuddin Chamchawala was asked by his 
father to give him a shave. "These old women of mine don't know which side 
of a Philishave is the business end." Changez's skin hung off his face in soft, 
leathery jowls, and his hair (when Salahuddin emptied the machine) looked 
like ashes. Salahuddin could not remember when he had last touched his 
father's face this way, gently drawing the skin tight as the cordless shaver 
moved across it, and then stroking it to make sure it felt smooth. When he 
had finished he continued for a moment to run his fingers along Changez's 
cheeks. "Look at the old man," Nasreen said to Kasturba as they entered the 
room, "he can't take his eyes off his boy." Changez Chamchawala grinned an 
exhausted grin, revealing a mouth full of shattered teeth, flecked with spittle 
and crumbs. 

When his father fell asleep again, after being forced by Kasturba and 
Nasreen to drink a small quantity of water, and gazed up at — what? -- with 
his open, dreaming eyes, which could see into three worlds at once, the 
actual world of his study, the visionary world of dreams, and the 
approaching after-life as well (or so Salahuddin, in a fanciful moment, found 
himself imagining); -- then the son went to Changez's old bedroom for a rest. 
Grotesque heads in painted terracotta glowered down at him from the walls: 
a horned demon; a leering Arab with a falcon on his shoulder; a bald man 
rolling his eyes upwards and putting his tongue out in panic as a huge black 
fly settled on his eyebrow. Unable to sleep beneath these figures, which he 
had known all his life and also hated, because he had come to see them as 
portraits of Changez, he moved finally to a different, neutral room. 
Waking up in the early evening, he went downstairs to find the two old 



women outside Changez's room, trying to work out the details of his 
medication. Apart from the daily Melphalan tablet, he had been prescribed a 
whole battery of drugs in an attempt to combat the cancer's pernicious side- 
effects: anaemia, the strain on the heart, and so on. Isosorbide dinitrate, 
two tablets, four times a day; Furosemide, one tablet, three times; 
Prednisolone, six tablets, twice daily . . . "I'll do this," he told the relieved 
old women. "At least it is one thing I can do." Agarol for his constipation, 
Spironolactone for goodness knew what, and a zyloric, Allopurinol: he 
suddenly remembered, crazily, an antique theatre review in which the 
English critic, Kenneth Tynan, had imagined the polysyllabic characters in 
Marlowe's _Tamburlaine the Great_ as "a horde of pills and wonder drugs 
bent on decimating one another": 
_Beard'st thou me here, thou bold Barbiturate?_ 
_Sirrah, thy grandam's dead -- old Nembutal_. 
_The spangled stars shall weep for NembutaL . . . 
_Is it not passing brave to be a king_, 
_Aureomycin and Formaldehyde_, 
_Is it not passing brave to be a king_ 
_And ride in triumph through Amphetamine?_ 

The things one's memory threw up! But perhaps this pharmaceutical 
_Tamburlaine_ was not such a bad eulogy for the fallen monarch lying here 
in his bookwormed study, staring into three worlds, waiting for the end. 
"Come on, Abba," he marched cheerily into the presence. "Time to save your 
life." 

Still in its place, on a shelf in Changez's study: a certain copper-- and-brass 
lamp, reputed to have the power of wish fulfilment, but as yet (because 
never rubbed) untested. Somewhat tarnished now, it looked down upon its 
dying owner; and was observed, in its turn, by his only son. Who was sorely 
tempted, for an instant, to get it down, rub three times, and ask the 
turbanned djinni for a magic spell . . . however, Salahuddin left the lamp 
where it was. There was no place for djinns or ghouls or afreets here; no 
spooks or fancies could be permitted. No magic formulae; just the 
impotence of the pills. "Here's the medicine man," Salahuddin sang out, 
rattling the little bottles, rousing his father from sleep. "Medicine," Changez 
grimaced childishly. "Eek, bhaak, thoo." 

ooo 

That night, Salahuddin forced Nasreen and Kasturba to sleep comfortably in 
their own beds while he kept watch over Changez from a mattress on the 
floor. After his midnight dose of Isosorbide, the dying man slept for three 
hours, and then needed to go to the toilet. Salahuddin virtually lifted him to 
his feet, and was astonished at Changez's lightness. This had always been a 
weighty man, but now he was a living lunch for the advancing cancer 
cells ... in the toilet, Changez refused all help. "He won't let you do one 
thing," Kasturba had complained lovingly. "Such a shy fellow that he is." On 



his way back to bed he leaned lightly on Salahuddin's arm, and shuffled 
along flat-footed in old, worn bedroom slippers, his remaining hairs sticking 
out at comical angles, his head stuck beakily forward on its scrawny, fragile 
neck. Salahuddin suddenly longed to pick the old man up, to cradle him in 
his arms and sing soft, comforting songs. Instead, he blurted out, at this 
least appropriate of moments, an appeal for reconciliation. "Abba, I came 
because I didn't want there to be trouble between us any more . . ." 
_Fucking idiot. The Devil damn thee black, thou cream-fac'd loon. In the 
middle of the bloody night! And if he hasn't guessed he's dying, that little 
deathbed speech will certainly have let him know_. Changez continued to 
shuffle along; his grip on his son's arm tightened very slightly. "That doesn't 
matter any more," he said. "It's forgotten, whatever it was." 
In the morning, Nasreen and Kasturba arrived in clean saris, looking rested 
and complaining, "It was so terrible sleeping away from him that we didn't 
sleep one wink." They fell upon Changez, and so tender were their caresses 
that Salahuddin had the same sense of spying on a private moment that 
he'd had at the wedding of Mishal Sufyan. He left the room quietly while the 
three lovers embraced, kissed and wept. 

Death, the great fact, wove its spell around the house on Scandal Point. 
Salahuddin surrendered to it like everyone else, even Changez, who, on that 
second day, often smiled his old crooked smile, the one that said I know 
what's up, I'll go along with it, just don't think I'm fooled. Kasturba and 
Nasreen fussed over him constantly, brushing his hair, coaxing him to eat 
and drink. His tongue had grown fat in his mouth, slurring his speech slightly, 
making it hard to swallow; he refused anything at all fibrous or stringy, even 
the chicken breasts he had loved all his life. A mouthful of soup, pureed 
potatoes, a taste of custard. Baby food. When he sat up in bed Salahuddin 
sat behind him; Changez leaned against his son's body while he ate. 
"Open the house," Changez commanded that morning. "I want to see some 
smiling faces here, instead of your three glum mugs." So, after a long time, 
people came: young and old, half-forgotten cousins, uncles, aunts; a few 
comrades from the old days of the nationalist movement, poker--backed 
gentlemen with silver hair, achkan jackets and monocles; employees of the 
various foundations and philanthropical enterprises set up by Changez years 
ago; rival manufacturers of agricultural sprays and artificial dung. A real bag 
of ailsorts, Salahuddin thought; but marvelled, also, at how beautifully 
everyone behaved in the presence of the dying man: the young spoke to 
him intimately about their lives, as if reassuring him that life itself was 
invincible, offering him the rich consolation of being a member of the great 
procession of the human race, -- while the old evoked the past, so that he 
knew nothing was forgotten, nothing lost; that in spite of the years of self- 
imposed sequestration he remained joined to the world. Death brought out 
the best in people; it was good to be shown -- Salahuddin realized -- that 
this, too, was what human beings were like: considerate, loving, even noble. 



We are still capable of exaltation, he thought in celebratory mood; in spite of 
everything, we can still transcend. A pretty young woman -- it occurred to 
Salahuddin that she was probably his niece, and he felt ashamed that he 
didn't know her name -- was taking Polaroid snapshots of Changez with his 
visitors, and the sick man was enjoying himself hugely, pulling faces, then 
kissing the many proffered cheeks with a light in his eyes that Salahuddin 
identified as nostalgia. "It's like a birthday party," he thought. Or: like 
Finnegan's wake. The dead man refusing to lie down and let the living have 
all the fun. 

"We have to tell him," Salahuddin insisted when the visitors had left. 
Nasreen bowed her head; and nodded. Kasturba burst into tears. 
They told him the next morning, having asked the specialist to attend to 
answer any questions Changez might have. The specialist, Panikkar (a name 
the English would mispronounce and giggle over, Salahuddin thought, like 
the Muslim "Fakhar"), arrived at ten, shining with self— esteem. "I should tell 
him," he said, taking control. "Most patients feel ashamed to let their loved 
ones see their fear." "The hell you will," Salahuddin said with a vehemence 
that took him by surprise. "Well, in that case," Panikkar shrugged, making 
as if to leave; which won the argument, because now Nasreen and Kasturba 
pleaded with Salahuddin: "Please, let's not fight." Salahuddin, defeated, 
ushered the doctor into his father's presence; and shut the study door. 
"I have a cancer," Changez Chamchawala said to Nasreen, Kasturba and 
Salahuddin after Panikkar's departure. He spoke clearly, enunciating the 
word with defiant, exaggerated care. "It is very far advanced. I am not 
surprised. I said to Panikkar: 'This is what I told you the very first day. 
Where else could all the blood have gone?'" -- Outside the study, Kasturba 
said to Salahuddin: "Since you came, there was a light in his eye. Yesterday, 
with all the people, how happy he was! But now his eye is dim. Now he 
won't fight." 

That afternoon Salahuddin found himself alone with his father while the two 
women napped. He discovered that he, who had been so determined to have 
everything out in the open, to say the word, was now awkward and 
inarticulate, not knowing how to speak. But Changez had something to say. 
"I want you to know," he said to his son, "that I have no problem about this 
thing at all. A man must die of something, and it is not as though I were 
dying young. I have no illusions; I know I am not going anywhere after this. 
It's the end. That's okay. The only thing I'm afraid of is pain, because when 
there is pain a man loses his dignity. I don't want that to happen." 
Salahuddin was awestruck. _First one falls in love with one's father all over 
again, and then one learns to look up to him, too_. "The doctors say you're a 
case in a million," he replied truthfully. "It looks like you have been spared 
the pain." Something in Changez relaxed at that, and Salahuddin realized 
how afraid the old man had been, how much he'd needed to be told... "Bas," 



Changez Chamchawala said gruffly. "Then I'm ready. And by the way: you 
get the lamp, after all." 

An hour later the diarrhoea began: a thin black trickle. Nasreen's anguished 
phone calls to the emergency room of the Breach Candy Hospital established 
that Panikkar was unavailable. "Take him off the Agarol at once," the duty 
doctor ordered, and prescribed Imodium instead. It didn't help. At seven pm 
the risk of dehydration was growing, and Changez was too weak to sit up for 
his food. He had virtually no appetite, but Kasturba managed to spoon-feed 
him a few drops of semolina with skinned apricots. "Yum, yum," he said 
ironically, smiling his crooked smile. 

He fell asleep, but by one o"clock had been up and down three times. "For 
God's sake," Salahuddin shouted down the telephone, "give me Panikkar's 
home number." But that was against hospital procedure. "You must judge," 
said the duty doctor, "if the time has come to bring him down." Bitch, 
Salahuddin Chamchawala mouthed. "Thanks a lot." 

At three o"clock Changez was so weak that Salahuddin more or less carried 
him to the toilet. "Get the car out," he shouted at Nasreen and Kasturba. 
"We're going to the hospital. Now." The proof of Changez's decline was that, 
this last time, he permitted his son to help him out. "Black shit is bad," he 
said, panting for breath. His lungs had filled up alarmingly; the breath was 
like bubbles pushing through glue. "Some cancers are slow, but I think this 
is very fast. Deterioration is very rapid." And Sala-- huddin, the apostle of 
truth, told comforting lies: _Abba, don't worry. You'll be fine_. Changez 
Chamchawala shook his head. "I'm going, son," he said. His chest heaved; 
Salahuddin grabbed a large plastic mug and held it under Changez's mouth. 
The dying man vomited up more than a pint of phlegm mixed up with blood: 
and after that was too weak to talk. This time Salahuddin did have to carry 
him, to the back seat of the Mercedes, where he sat between Nasreen and 
Kasturba while Salahuddin drove at top speed to Breach Candy Hospital, half 
a mile down the road. "Shall I open the window, Abba?" he asked at one 
point, and Changez shook his head and bubbled: "No." Much later, 
Salahuddin realized this had been his father's last word. 
The emergency ward. Running feet, orderlies, wheelchair, Changez being 
heaved on to a bed, curtains. A young doctor, doing what had to be done, 
very quickly but without the appearance of speed. _I like him_, Salahuddin 
thought. Then the doctor looked him in the eye and said: "I don't think he's 
going to make it." It felt like being punched in the stomach. Salahuddin 
realized he'd been clinging on to a futile hope, _they'll fix him and we'll take 
him home; this isn't "it"_, and his instant reaction to the doctor's words was 
rage. _You're the mechanic. Don't tell me the car won't start; mend the 
damn thing_. Changez was flat out, drowning in his lungs. "We can't get at 
his chest in this kurta; may we . . ." _Cut it off Do what you have to do_. 
Drips, the blip of a weakening heartbeat on a screen, helplessness. The 
young doctor murmuring: "It won't be long now, so . . ." At which, 



Salahuddin Chamchawala did a crass thing. He turned to Nasreen and 
Kasturba and said: "Come quickly now. Come and say goodbye." "For God's 
sake!" the doctor exploded . . . the women did not weep, but came up to 
Changez and took a hand each. Salahuddin blushed for shame. He would 
never know if his father heard the death-sentence dripping from the lips of 
his son. 

Now Salahuddin found better words, his Urdu returning to him after a long 
absence. _We're all beside you, Abba. We all love you very much_. Changez 
could not speak, but that was, -- was it not? -- yes, it must have been -- a 
little nod of recognition. _He heard me_. Then all of a sudden Changez 
Chamchawala left his face; he was still alive, but he had gone somewhere 
else, had turned inwards to look at whatever there was to see. _He is 
teaching me how to die_, Salahuddin thought. _He does not avert his eyes, 
but looks death right in the face_. At no point in his dying did Changez 
Chamchawala speak the name of God. 

"Please," the doctor said, "go outside the curtain now and let us make our 
effort." Salahuddin took the two women a few steps away; and now, when a 
curtain hid Changez from their sight, they wept. "He swore he would never 
leave me," Nasreen sobbed, her iron control broken at last, "and he has 
gone away." Salahuddin went to watch through a crack in the curtain; -- and 
saw the voltage being pumped into his father's body, the sudden green 
jaggedness of the pulse on the monitor screen; saw doctor and nurses 
pounding his father's chest; saw defeat. 

The last thing he had seen in his father's face, just before the medical staff's 
final, useless effort, was the dawning of a terror so profound that it chilled 
Salahuddin to the bone. What had he seen? What was it that waited for him, 
for all of us, that brought such fear to a brave man's eyes? -- Now, when it 
was over, he returned to Changez's bedside; and saw his father's mouth 
curved upwards, in a smile. 

He caressed those sweet cheeks. _I didn't shave him today. He died with 
stubble on his chin_. How cold his face was already; but the brain, the brain 
retained a little warmth. They had stuffed cottonwool into his nostrils. _But 
suppose there's been a mistake? What if he wants to breathe?_ Nasreen 
Chamchawala was beside him. "Let's take your father home," she said. 

ooo 

Changez Chamchawala returned home in an ambulance, lying in an 
aluminium tray on the floor between the two women who had loved him, 
while Salahuddin followed in the car. Ambulance men laid him to rest in his 
study; Nasreen turned the air--conditioner up high. This was, after all, a 
tropical death, and the sun would be up soon. 

_What did he see?_ Salahuddin kept thinking. _Why the horror? And, 
whence that final smile?_ 

People came again. Uncles, cousins, friends took charge, arranging 
everything. Nasreen and Kasturba sat on white sheets on the floor of the 



room in which, once upon a time, Saladin and Zeeny had visited the ogre, 
Changez; women sat with them to mourn, many of them reciting the qalmah 
over and over, with the help of counting beads. Salahuddin was irritated by 
this; but lacked the will to tell them to stop. -- Then the mullah came, and 
sewed Changez's winding-sheet, and it was time to wash the body; and even 
though there were many men present, and there was no need for him to 
help, Salahuddin insisted. _If he could look his death in the eye, then I can 
do it, too_. -- And when his father was being washed, his body rolled this 
way and that at the mullah's command, the flesh bruised and slabby, the 
appendix scar long and brown, Salahuddin recalled the only other time in his 
life when he'd seen his physically demure father naked: he'd been nine years 
old, blundering into a bathroom where Changez was taking a shower, and 
the sight of his father's penis was a shock he'd never forgotten. That thick 
squat organ, like a club. O the power of it; and the insignificance of his 
own. . . "His eyes won't close," the mullah complained. "You should have 
done it before." He was a stocky, pragmatic fellow, this mullah with his 
mous-- tacheless beard. He treated the dead body as a commonplace thing, 
needing washing the way a car does, or a window, or a dish. "You are from 
London? Proper London? -- I was there many years. I was doorman at 
Claridge's Hotel." _Oh? Really? How interesting_. The man wanted to make 
small—talk! Salahuddin was appalled. _That's my father, don't you 
understand?_ "These garments," the mullah asked, indicating Changez's last 
kurta-- pajama outfit, the one which the hospital staff had cut open to get at 
his chest. "You have need of them?" _No, no. Take them. Please_. "You are 
very kind." Small pieces of black cloth were being stuffed into Changez's 
mouth and under his eyelids. "This cloth has been to Mecca," the mullah said. 
_Get it out!_ "I don't understand. It is holy fabric." _You heard me: out, 
out_. "May God have mercy on your soul." 
And: 

The bier, strewn with flowers, like an outsize baby's cot. 

The body, wrapped in white, with sandalwood shavings, for fragrance, 

scattered all about it. 

More flowers, and a green silken covering with Quranic verses embroidered 
upon it in gold. 

The ambulance, with the bier resting in it, awaiting the widows' permission 
to depart. 

The last farewells of women. 

The graveyard. Male mourners rushing to lift the bier on their shoulders 
trample Salahuddin's foot, ripping off a segment of the nail on his big toe. 
Among the mourners, an estranged old friend of Changez's, here in spite of 
double pneumonia; -- and another old gentleman, weeping copiously, who 
will die himself the very next day; -- and all sorts, the walking records of a 
dead man's life. 



The grave. Salahuddin climbs down into it, stands at the head end, the 
gravedigger at the foot. Changez Chamchawala is lowered down. _The 
weight of my father's head, lying in my hand. I laid it down; to rest_. 
The world, somebody wrote, is the place we prove real by dying in it. 

ooo 

Waiting for him when he returned from the graveyard: a copperand--brass 
lamp, his renewed inheritance. He went into Changez's study and closed the 
door. There were his old slippers by the bed: he had become, as he'd 
foretold, "a pair of emptied shoes". The bedclothes still bore the imprint of 
his father's body; the room was full of sickly perfume: sandalwood, camphor, 
cloves. He took the lamp from its shelf and sat at Changez's desk. Taking a 
handkerchief from his pocket, he rubbed briskly: once, twice, thrice. 
The lights all went on at once. 
Zeenat Vakil entered the room. 

"O God, I'm sorry, maybe you wanted them off, but with the blinds closed it 
was just so sad." Waving her arms, speaking loudly in her beautiful croak of 
a voice, her hair woven, for once, into a waist-length ponytail, here she was, 
his very own djinn. "I feel so bad I didn't come before, I was just trying to 
hurt you, what a time to choose, so bloody self-indulgent, yaar, it's good to 
see you, you poor orphaned goose." 

She was the same as ever, immersed in life up to her neck, combining 
occasional art lectures at the university with her medical practice and her 
political activities. "I was at the goddamn hospital when you came, you know? 
I was right there, but I didn't know about your dad until it was over, and 
even then I didn't come to give you a hug, what a bitch, if you want to throw 
me out I will have no complaints." This was a generous woman, the most 
generous he'd known. _When you see her, you'll know_, he had promised 
himself, and it turned out to be true. "I love you," he heard himself saying, 
stopping her in her tracks. "Okay, I won't hold you to that," she finally said, 
looking hugely pleased. "Balance of your mind is obviously disturbed. Lucky 
for you you aren't in one of our great public hospitals; they put the loonies 
next to the heroin addicts, and there's so much drug traffic in the wards that 
the poor schizos end up with bad habits. -- Anyway, if you say it again after 
forty days, watch out, because maybe then I'll take it seriously. Just now it 
could be a disease." 

Undefeated (and, it appeared, unattached), Zeeny's reentry into his life 
completed the process of renewal, of regeneration, that had been the most 
surprising and paradoxical product of his father's terminal illness. His old 
English life, its bizarreries, its evils, now seemed very remote, 



even irrelevant, like his truncated stage-name. "About time," Zeeny 
approved when he told her of his return to _Salahuddin_. "Now you can stop 
acting at last." Yes, this looked like the start of a new phase, in which the 
world would be solid and real, and in which there was no longer the broad 
figure of a parent standing between himself and the inevitability of the grave. 
An orphaned life, like Muhammad"s; like everyone's. A life illuminated by a 
strangely radiant death, which continued to glow, in his mind's eye, like a 
sort of magic lamp. 

_I must think of myself, from now on, as living perpetually in the first 
instant of the future_, he resolved a few days later, in Zeeny's apartment on 
Sophia College Lane, while recovering in her bed from the toothy 
enthusiasms of her lovemaking. (She had invited him home shyly, as if she 
were removing a veil after long concealment.) But a history is not so easily 
shaken off; he was also living, after all, in the _present moment of the past_, 
and his old life was about to surge around him once again, to complete its 
final act. 

ooo 

He became aware that he was a rich man. Under the terms of Changez's will, 
the dead tycoon's vast fortune and myriad business interests were to be 
supervised by a group of distinguished trustees, the income being divided 
equally between three parties: Changez's second wife Nasreen, Kasturba, 
whom he referred to in the document as "in every true sense, my third", and 
his son, Salahuddin. After the deaths of the two women, however, the trust 
could be dissolved whenever Salahuddin chose: he inherited, in short, the lot. 
"On the condition," Changez Chamchawala had mischievously stipulated, 
"that the scoundrel accepts the gift he previously spurned, viz., the 
requisitioned schoolhouse situated at Solan, Himachal Pradesh." Changez 
might have chopped down a walnut-tree, but he had never attempted to cut 
Salahuddin out of his will. — The houses at Pali Hill and Scandal Point were 
excluded from these provisions, however. The former passed to Nasreen 
Chamchawala outright; the latter became, with immediate effect, the sole 
property of Kasturbabai, who quickly announced her intention of selling the 
old house to property developers. The site was worth crores, and Kasturba 
was wholly unsentimental about real estate. Salahuddin protested 
vehemently, and was slapped down hard. "I have lived my whole life here," 
she informed him. "It is therefore for me only to say." Nasreen 
Chamchawala was entirely indifferent to the fate of the old place. "One more 
high-rise, one less piece of old Bombay," she shrugged. "What's the 
difference? Cities change." She was already preparing to move back to Pali 
Hill, taking the cases of butterflies off the walls, assembling her stuffed birds 
in the ball. "Let it go," Zeenat Vakil said. "You couldn't live in that museum, 
anyway." 

She was right, of course; no sooner had he resolved to set his face towards 
the future than he started mooning around and regretting childhood's end. 



"I'm off to meet George and Bhupen, you remember," she said. "Why don't 
you come along? You need to start plugging into the town." George Miranda 
had just completed a documentary film about communalism, interviewing 
Hindus and Muslims of all shades of opinion. Fundamentalists of both 
religions had instantly sought injunctions banning the film from being shown, 
and, although the Bombay courts had rejected this request, the case had 
gone up to the Supreme Court. George, even more stubbly of chin, lank of 
hair and sprawling of stomach than Salahuddin remembered, drank rum in a 
Dhobi Talao boozer and thumped the table with pessimistic fists. "This is the 
Supreme Court of Shah Bano fame," he cried, referring to the notorious case 
in which, under pressure from Islamic extremists, the Court had ruled that 
alimony payments were contrary to the will of Allah, thus making India's 
laws even more reactionary than, for example, Pakistan's. "So I don't have 
much hope." He twisted, disconsolately, the waxy points of his moustache. 
His new girlfriend, a tall, thin Bengali woman with cropped hair that 
reminded Salahuddin a little of Mishal Sufyan, chose this moment to attack 
Bhupen Gandhi for having published a volume of poems about his visit to the 
"little temple town" of Gagari in the Western Ghats. The poems had been 
criticized by the Hindu right; one eminent South Indian professor had 
announced that Bhupen had "forfeited his right to be called an Indian poet", 
but in the opinion of the young woman, Swatilekha, Bhupen had been 
seduced by religion into a dangerous ambiguity. Grey hair flopping earnestly, 
moon-face shining, Bhupen defended himself. "I have said that the only crop 
of Gagari is the stone gods being quarried from the hills. I have spoken of 
herds of legends, with sacred cowbells tinkling, grazing on the hillsides. 
These are not ambiguous images." Swatilekha wasn't convinced. "These 
days," she insisted, "our positions must be stated with crystal clarity. All 
metaphors are capable of misinterpretation." She offered her theory. Society 
was orchestrated by what she called _grand narratives_: history, economics, 
ethics. In India, the development of a corrupt and closed state apparatus 
had "excluded the masses of the people from the ethical project". As a result, 
they sought ethical satisfactions in the oldest of the grand narratives, that is, 
religious faith. "But these narratives are being manipulated by the theocracy 
and various political elements in an entirely retrogressive way." Bhupen said: 
"We can't deny the ubiquity of faith. If we write in such a way as to pre- 
judge such belief as in some way deluded or false, then are we not guilty of 
elitism, of imposing our world-view on the masses?" Swatilekha was scornful. 
"Battle lines are being drawn up in India today," she cried. "Secular versus 
rational, the light versus the dark. Better you choose which side you are on." 
Bhupen got up, angrily, to go. Zeeny pacified him: "We can't afford schisms. 
There's planning to be done." He sat down again, and Swatilekha kissed him 
on the cheek. "I'm sorry," she said. "Too much college education, George 
always says. In fact, I loved the poems. I was only arguing a case." Bhupen, 
mollified, pretended to punch her on the nose; the crisis passed. 



They had met, Salahuddin now gathered, to discuss their part in a 
remarkable political demonstration: the formation of a human chain, 
stretching from the Gateway of India to the outermost northern suburbs of 
the city, in support of "national integration". The Communist Party of India 
(Marxist) had recently organized just such a human chain in Kerala, with 
great success. "But," George Miranda argued, "here in Bombay it will be 
totally another matter. In Kerala the C P(M) is in power. Here, with these 
Shiv Sena bastards in control, we can expect every type of harassment, 
from police obstructionism to outand— out assaults by mobs on segments of 
the chain -- especially when it passes, as it will have to, through the Sena's 
fortresses, in Mazagaon, etc." In spite of these dangers, Zeeny explained to 
Salahuddin, such public demonstrations were essential. As communal 
violence escalated -- and Meerut was only the latest in a long line of 
murderous incidents -- it was imperative that the forces of disintegration 
weren't permitted to have things all their own way. "We must show that 
there are also counterforces at work." Salahuddin was somewhat bemused 
at the rapidity with which, once again, his life had begun to change. _Me, 
taking part in a CP(M) event. Wonders will never cease; I really must be in 
love_. 

Once they had settled matters -- how many friends each of them might 
manage to bring along, where to assemble, what to carry in the way of food, 
drink and first-aid equipment -- they relaxed, drank down the cheap, dark 
rum, and chattered inconsequentially, and that was when Salahuddin heard, 
for the first time, the rumours about the odd behaviour of the film star 
Gibreel Farishta that had started circulating in the city, and felt his old life 
prick him like a hidden thorn; -- heard the past, like a distant trumpet, 
ringing in his ears. 

ooo 

The Gibreel Farishta who returned to Bombay from London to pick up the 
threads of his film career was not, by general consensus, the old, irresistible 
Gibreel. "Guy seems hell--bent on a suicide course," George Miranda, who 
knew all the filmi gossip, declared. "Who knows why? They say because he 
was unlucky in love he's gone a little wild." Salahuddin kept his mouth shut, 
but felt his face heating up. Allie Cone had refused to have Gibreel back after 
the fires of Brickhall. In the matter of forgiveness, Salahuddin reflected, 
nobody had thought to consult the entirely innocent and greatly injured 
Alleluia; _once again, we made her life peripheral to our own. No wonder 
she's still hopping mad_. Gibreel had told Salahuddin, in a final and 
somewhat strained telephone call, that he was returning to Bombay "in the 
hope that I never have to see her, or you, or this damn cold city, again in 
what remains of my life". And now here he was, by all accounts, 
shipwrecking himself again, and on home ground, too. "He's making some 
weird movies," George went on. "And this time he's had to put in his own 
cash. After the two flops, producers have been pulling out fast. So if this one 



goes down, he's broke, done for, _funtoosh_." Gibreel had embarked on a 
modern--dress remake of the Ramayana story in which the heroes and 
heroines had become corrupt and evil instead of pure and free from sin. 
Here was a lecherous, drunken Rama and a flighty Sita; while Ravana, the 
demon-king, was depicted as an upright and honest man. "Gibreel is playing 
Ravana," George explained in fascinated horror. "Looks like he's trying 
deliberately to set up a final confrontation with religious sectarians, knowing 
he can't win, that he'll be broken into bits." Several members of the cast had 
already walked off the production, and given lurid interviews accusing 
Gibreel of "blasphemy", "satanism" and other misdemeanours. His most 
recent mistress, Pimple Billimoria, was seen on the cover of _Cine-Blitz_, 
saying: "It was like kissing the Devil." Gibreel's old problem of suiphurous 
halitosis had evidently returned with a vengeance. His erratic behaviour had 
been causing tongues to wag even more than his choice of subjects to film. 
"Some days he's sweetness and light," George said. "On others, he comes to 
work like lord god almighty and actually insists that people get down and 
kneel. Personally I don't believe the film will be finished unless and until he 
sorts out his mental health which, I genuinely feel, is affected. First the 
illness, then the plane crash, then the unhappy love affair: you can 
understand the guy's problems." And there were worse rumours: his tax 
affairs were under investigation; police officers had visited him to ask 
questions about the death of Rekha Merchant, and Rekha's husband, the 
ball-bearings king, had threatened to "break every bone in the bastard's 
body", so that for a few days Gibreel had to be accompanied by bodyguards 
when he used the Everest Vilas lifts; and worst of all were the suggestions of 
his nocturnal visits to the city's red-light district where, it was hinted, he had 
frequented certain Foras Road establishments until the dadas threw him out 
because the women were getting hurt. "They say some of them were very 
badly damaged," George said. "That big hush-money had to be paid. I don't 
know. People say any damn thing. That Pimple of course jumped right on 
the bandwagon. _The Man that Hates Women_. She's making herself a 
femme fatale star out of all this. But there is something badly wrong with 
Farishta. You know the fellow, I hear," George finished, looking at 
Salahuddin; who blushed. 

"Not very well. Just because of the plane crash and so on." He was in turmoil. 
It seemed Gibreel had not managed to escape from his inner demons. He, 
Salahuddin, had believed -- naively, it now turned out -- that the events of 
the Brickhall fire, when Gibreel saved his life, had in some way cleansed 
them both, had driven those devils out into the consuming flames; that, in 
fact, love had shown that it could exert a humanizing power as great as that 
of hatred; that virtue could transform men as well as vice. But nothing was 
forever; no cure, it appeared, was complete. 

"The film industry is full of wackos," Swatilekha was telling George, 
affectionately. "Just look at you, mister." But Bhupen grew serious. "I always 



saw Gibreel as a positive force," he said. "An actor from a minority playing 
roles from many religions, and being accepted. If he has fallen out of favour, 
it's a bad sign." 

Two days later, Salahuddin Chamchawala read in his Sunday papers that an 
international team of mountaineers, on their way to attempt an ascent of the 
Hidden Peak, had arrived in Bombay; and when he saw that among the 
team was the famed "Queen of Everest", Miss Alleluia Cone, he had a 
strange sense of being haunted, a feeling that the shades of his imagination 
were stepping out into the real world, that destiny was acquiring the slow, 
fatal logic of a dream. "Now I know what a ghost is," he thought. "Unfinished 
business, that's what." 

ooo 

Allie's presence in Bombay came, in the next two days, to preoccupy him 
more and more. His mind insisted on making strange Connections, between, 
for example, the evident recovery of her feet and the end of her affair with 
Gibreel: as if he had been crippling her with his jealous love. His rational 
mind knew that, in fact, her problem with the fallen arches had preceded her 
relationship with Gibreel, but he had entered an oddly dreamy mood, and 
seemed impervious to logic. What was she really doing here? Why had she 
really come? Some terrible doom, he became convinced, was in store. 
Zeeny, her medical surgeries, college lectures and work for the human-chain 
demonstration leaving her no time, at present, for Salahuddin and his moods, 
mistakenly saw his introverted silence as expressive of doubts -- about his 
return to Bombay, about being dragged into political activity of a type that 
had always been abhorrent to him, about her. To disguise her fears, she 
spoke to him in the form of a lecture. "If you're serious about shaking off 
your foreignness, Salad baba, then don't fall into some kind of rootless limbo 
instead. Okay? We're all here. We're right in front of you. You should really 
try and make an adult acquaintance with this place, this time. Try and 
embrace this city, as it is, not some childhood memory that makes you both 
nostalgic and sick. Draw it close. The actually existing place. Make its faults 
your own. Become its creature; belong." He nodded, absently; and she, 
thinking he was preparing to leave her once again, stormed out in a rage 
that left him utterly perplexed. 

Should he telephone Allie? Had Gibreel told her about the voices? 
Should he try to see Gibreel? 

Something is about to happen, his inner voice warned. It's going to happen, 
and you don't know what it is, and you can't do a damn thing about it. Oh 
yes: it's something bad. 

ooo 

It happened on the day of the demonstration, which, against all the odds, 
was a pretty fair success. A few minor skirmishes were reported from the 
Mazagaon district, but the event was, in general, an orderly one. CPI(M) 
observers reported an unbroken chain of men and women linking hands 



from top to bottom of the city, and Salahuddin, standing between Zeeny and 
Bhupen on Muhammad AN Road, could not deny the power of the image. 
Many people in the chain were in tears. The order to join hands had been 
given by the organizers -- Swatilekha prominent among them, riding on the 
back of a jeep, megaphone in hand — at eight am precisely; one hour later, 
as the city's rush—hour traffic reached its blaring peak, the crowd began to 
disperse. However, in spite of the thousands involved in the event, in spite 
of its peaceful nature and positive message, the formation of the human 
chain was not reported on the Doordarshan television news. Nor did All-India 
Radio carry the story. The majority of the (government-supporting) 
"language press" also omitted any mentions. . . one English-language daily, 
and one Sunday paper, carried the story; that was all. Zeeny, recalling the 
treatment of the Kerala chain, had forecast this deafening silence as she and 
Salahuddin walked home. "It's a Communist show," she explained. "So, 
officially, it's a non-event." 
What grabbed the evening paper headlines? 

What screamed at readers in inch— high letters, while the human chain was 
not permitted so much as a small print whisper? 

EVEREST QUEEN, FILM MOGUL PERISH 

DOUBLE TRAGEDY ON MALABAR HILL GIBREEL FARISHTA 
VANISHES CURSE OF EVEREST VILAS STRIKES AGAIN 

The body of the respected movie producer, S. S. Sisodia, had been 
discovered by domestic staff, lying in the centre of the living-room rug in the 
apartment of the celebrated actor Mr. Gibreel Farishta, with a hole through 
the heart. Miss Alleluia Cone, in what was believed to be a "related incident", 
had fallen to her death from the roof of the skyscraper, from which, a couple 
of years previously, Mrs. Rekha Merchant had hurled her children and herself 
towards the concrete below. 

The morning papers were less equivocal about Farishta's latest role. 
FARISHTA, UNDER SUSPICION, ABSCONDS. 
"I'm going back to Scandal Point," Salahuddin told Zeeny, who, 
misunderstanding this withdrawal into an inner chamber of the spirit, flared 
up, "Mister, you'd better make up your mind." Leaving, he did not know how 
to reassure her; how to explain his overwhelming feeling of guilt, of 
_responsibility_: how to tell her that these killings were the dark flowers of 
seeds he had planted long ago? "I just need to think," he said, weakly, 
confirming her suspicions. "Just a day or two." 

"Salad baba," she said harshly, "I've got to hand it to you, man. Your timing: 
really great." 

ooo 

On the night after his participation in the making of the human chain, 
Salahuddin Chamchawala was looking out of the window of his childhood 



bedroom at the nocturnal patterns of the Arabian Sea, when Kasturba 
knocked urgently on his door. "A man is here to see you," she said, almost 
hissing the words, plainly scared. Salahuddin had seen nobody coming 
through the gate. "From the servants' entrance," Kasturba said in response 
to his inquiry. "And, baba, listen, it is that Gibreel. Gibreel Farishta, who the 
papers say . . ." her voice trailed off and she chewed, fretfully, at the nails 
on her left hand. 
"Where is he?" 

"What to do, I was afraid," Kasturba cried. "I told him, in your father's study, 
he is waiting there only. But maybe it is better you don't go. Should I call 
the police? Baapu re, that such a thing." 
No. Don't call. I'll go see what he wants_. 

Gibreel was sitting on Changez's bed with the old lamp in his hands. He was 
wearing a dirty white kurta-pajama outfit and looked like a man who had 
been sleeping rough. His eyes were unfocused, lightless, dead. "Spoono," he 
said wearily, waving the lamp in the direction of an armchair. "Make yourself 
at home." 

"You look awful," Salahuddin ventured, eliciting from the other man a distant, 
cynical, unfamiliar smile. "Sit down and shut up, Spoono," Gibreel Farishta 
said. "I'm here to tell you a story." 

_It was you, then_, Salahuddin understood. _You really did it: you murdered 
them both_. But Gibreel had closed his eyes, put his fingertips together and 
embarked upon his story, -- which was also the end of many stories, -- thus: 
Kan ma kan 
Fi qadim azzaman . . . 

ooo 

It was so it was not in a time long forgot 
Well, anyway goes something like this 

I can't be sure because when they came to call I wasn't myself no yaar not 
myself at all some days are hard how to tell you what sickness is like 
something like this but I can't be sure 

Always one part of me is standing outside screaming no please don't no but 

it does no good you see when the sickness comes 

I am the angel the god damned angel of god and these days it's the 

avenging angel Gibreel the avenger always vengeance why 

I can't be sure something like this for the crime of being human 

especially female but not exclusively people must pay 



Something like that 

So he brought her along he meant no harm I know that now he just wanted 

us to be together caca can't you see he said she isn't ohoh over you not by a 

longshot and you he said still crazy fofor her everyone knows all he wanted 

was for us to be to be to be 

But I heard verses 

You get me Spoono 

Verses 

Rosy apple lemon tart Sis boom bah 
I like coffee I like tea 

Violets are blue roses are red remember me when I am dead dead dead 
That type of thing 

Couldn't get them out of my nut and she changed in front of my eyes I 
called her names whore like that and him I knew about him 
Sisodia lecher from somewhere I knew what they were up to 
laughing at me in my own home something like that 
I like butter I like toast 

Verses Spoono who do you think makes such damn things up 

So I called down the wrath of God I pointed my finger I shot him in the heart 

but she bitch I thought bitch cool as ice 

stood and waited just waited and then I don't know I can't be sure we 
weren't alone Something like this 

Rekha was there floating on her carpet you remember her Spoono 
you remember Rekha on her carpet when we fell and someone else mad 
looking guy Scottish get-up _gora_ type 
didn't catch the name 

She saw them or she didn't see them I can't be sure she just stood there 

It was Rekha's idea take her upstairs summit of Everest once you've been 

there the only way is down 

I pointed my finger at her we went up 

I didn't push her 

Rekha pushed her 

I wouldn't have pushed her 

Spoono 

Understand me Spoono 

Bloody hell 

I loved that girl. 

ooo 

Salahuddin was thinking how Sisodia, with his remarkable gift for the chance 
encounter (Gibreel stepping out in front of London traffic, Salahuddin himself 
panicking before an open aircraft door, and now, it seemed, Alleluia Cone in 
her hotel lobby) had fmally bumped accidentally into death; -- and thinking, 
too, about Allie, less lucky a faller than himself, making (instead of her 
longed-for solo ascent of Everest) this ignominiously fatal descent, -- and 



about how he was going to die for his verses, but could not find it in himself 
to call the death-sentence unjust. 

There was a knocking at the door. _Open, please. Police_. Kasturba had 
called them, after all. 

Gibreel took the lid off the wonderful lamp of Changez Chamchawala and let 
it fall clattering to the floor. 

_He's hidden a gun inside_, Salahuddin realized. "Watch out," he shouted. 
"There's an armed man in here." The knocking stopped, and now Gibreel 
rubbed his hand along the side of the magic lamp: once, twice, thrice. 
The revolver jumped up, into his other hand. 
_A fearsome jinnee of monstrous stature appeared_, Salahuddin 
remembered. _"What is your wish? I am the slave of him who holds the 
lamp."_ What a limiting thing is a weapon, Salahuddin thought, feeling oddly 
detached from events. -- Like Gibreel when the sickness came. -- Yes, 
indeed; a most confining manner of thing. — For how few the choices were, 
now that Gibreel was the _armed man_ and he, the _unarmed_; how the 
universe had shrunk! The true djinns of old had the power to open the gates 
of the Infinite, to make all things possible, to render all wonders capable of 
being attained; how banal, in comparison, was this modern spook, this 
degraded descendant of mighty ancestors, this feeble slave of a twentieth- 
century lamp. 

"I told you a long time back," Gibreel Farishta quietly said, "that if I thought 
the sickness would never leave me, that it would always return, I would not 
be able to bear up to it." Then, very quickly, before Salahuddin could move a 
finger, Gibreel put the barrel of the gun into his own mouth; and pulled the 
trigger; and was free. 

He stood at the window of his childhood and looked out at the Arabian Sea. 
The moon was almost full; moonlight, stretching from the rocks of Scandal 
Point out to the far horizon, created the illusion of a silver pathway, like a 
parting in the water's shining hair, like a road to miraculous lands. He shook 
his head; could no longer believe in fairy-tales. Childhood was over, and the 
view from this window was no more than an old and sentimental echo. To 
the devil with it! Let the bulldozers come. If the old refused to die, the new 
could not be born. 

"Come along," Zeenat Vakil's voice said at his shoulder. It seemed that in 
spite of all his wrong-doing, weakness, guilt -- in spite of his humanity -- he 
was getting another chance. There was no accounting for one's good fortune, 
that was plain. There it simply was, taking his elbow in its hand. "My place," 
Zeeny offered. "Let's get the hell out of here." 
"I'm coming," he answered her, and turned away from the view. 
