George Orwell
George Orwell is the pen name used by the British author
Eric Blair (1903–1950). Orwell was born in the Indian
village of Motihari, near Nepal, where his father was stationed in the Civil Service. India was then part of the
British Empire. From 1907 to 1922 Orwell lived in England, returning to India and Burma and a position in the
Imperial Police, which he held until 1927. Thereafter he
lived in England, Paris, Spain, and elsewhere, writing on a
wide range of topics. He fought in the Spanish Civil War
and was actively engaged in several political movements, always against totalitarianism of any kind. He is best known
today for two novels of political satire: Animal Farm
(1945) and 1984 (1949). He was also a prolific journalist and essayist, with his essays collected in five volumes. Orwell wrote “Why I Write” near the end of his life, looking
back and writing autobiographically about his own experiences and writing even as he generalizes about all writers.
Though Orwell asserts that he, like all writers, is “vain, selfish and lazy,” we take this with a grain of salt even as he
gives us many insights into the writer’s motivations.
From a very early age, perhaps the age of five or six, I knew that
when I grew up I should be a writer. Between the ages of about
seventeen and twenty-four I tried to abandon this idea, but I did
so with the consciousness that I was outraging my true nature and that
sooner or later I should have to settle down and write books.
I was the middle child of three, but there was a gap of five years
on either side, and I barely saw my father before I was eight. For this
1
From Such, Such Were the Joys by George Orwell. Published by Harcourt, Brace, &
Co. Copyright © 1953 by Sonia Brownell Orwell, renewed 1981 by Mrs. George K.
Perutz, Mrs. Miriam Gross, Dr. Michael Dickson, Executors of the Estate of Sonia
Brownell Orwell.
1
and other reasons I was somewhat lonely, and I soon developed disagreeable mannerisms which made me unpopular throughout my
schooldays. I had the lonely child’s habit of making up stories and
holding conversations with imaginary persons, and I think from the
very start my literary ambitions were mixed up with the feeling of
being isolated and undervalued. I knew that I had a facility with words
and a power of facing unpleasant facts, and I felt that this created a
sort of private world in which I could get my own back for my failure
in everyday life. Nevertheless the volume of serious—i.e., seriously intended—writing which I produced all through my childhood and
boyhood would not amount to half a dozen pages. I wrote my first
poem at the age of four or five, my mother taking it down to dictation. I cannot remember anything about it except that it was about a
tiger and the tiger had “chair-like teeth”—a good enough phrase, but
I fancy the poem was a plagiarism of Blake’s “Tiger, Tiger.” At eleven,
when the war of 1914–18 broke out, I wrote a patriotic poem which
was printed in the local newspaper, as was another, two years later, on
the death of Kitchener. From time to time, when I was a bit older, I
wrote bad and usually unfinished “nature poems” in the Georgian
style. I also, about twice, attempted a short story which was a ghastly
failure. That was the total of the would-be serious work that I actually
set down on paper during all those years.
However, throughout this time I did in a sense engage in literary
activities. To begin with there was the made-to-order stuff which I
produced quickly, easily and without much pleasure to myself . Apart
from school work, I wrote vers d’occasion, semi-comic poems which I
could turn out at what now seems to me astonishing speed—at fourteen I wrote a whole rhyming play, in imitation of Aristophanes, in
about a week—and helped to edit school magazines, both printed and
in manuscript. These magazines were the most pitiful burlesque stuff
that you could imagine, and I took far less trouble with them than I
now would with the cheapest journalism. But side by side with all this,
for fifteen years or more, I was carrying out a literary exercise of a quite
different kind: this was the making up of a continuous “story” about
myself, a sort of diary existing only in the mind. I believe this is a common habit of children and adolescents. As a very small child I used to
imagine that I was, say, Robin Hood, and picture myself as the hero
of thrilling adventures, but quite soon my “story” ceased to be narcissistic in a crude way and became more and more a mere description
D Orwell • Why I Write d
of what I was doing and the things I saw. For minutes at a time this
kind of thing would be running through my head: “He pushed the
door open and entered the room. A yellow beam of sunlight, filtering
through the muslin curtains, slanted on to the table, where a matchbox, half open, lay beside the inkpot. With his right hand in his
pocket he moved across to the window. Down in the street a tortoiseshell cat was chasing a dead leaf,” etc. etc. This habit continued till I
was about twenty-five, right through my non-literary years. Although
I had to search, and did search, for the right words, I seemed to be
making this descriptive effort almost against my will, under a kind of
compulsion from outside. The “story” must, I suppose, have reflected
the styles of the various writers I admired at different ages, but so far
as I remember it always had the same meticulous descriptive quality.
When I was about sixteen I suddenly discovered the joy of mere
words, i.e., the sounds and associations of words. The lines from Paradise Lost,
So hee with difficulty and labour hard
Moved on: with difficulty and labour hee.
which do not now seem to me so very wonderful, sent shivers down
my backbone; and the spelling “hee” for “he” was an added pleasure.
As for the need to describe things, I knew all about it already. So it is
clear what kind of books I wanted to write, in so far as I could be said
to want to write books at that time. I wanted to write enormous naturalistic novels with unhappy endings, full of detailed descriptions
and arresting similes, and also full of purple passages in which words
were used partly for the sake of their sound. And in fact my first completed novel, Burmese Days, which I wrote when I was thirty but projected much earlier, is rather that kind of book.
I give all this background information because I do not think one
can assess a writer’s motives without knowing something of his early
development. His subject matter will be determined by the age he lives
in—at least this is true in tumultuous, revolutionary ages like our
own—but before he ever begins to write he will have acquired an emotional attitude from which he will never completely escape. It is his
job, no doubt, to discipline his temperament and avoid getting stuck
at some immature stage, or in some perverse mood: but if he escapes
from his early influences altogether, he will have killed his impulse to
write. Putting aside the need to earn a living, I think there are four
D Orwell • Why I Write d
5 5
great motives for writing, at any rate for writing prose. They exist in
different degrees in every writer, and in any one writer the proportions
will vary from time to time, according to the atmosphere in which he
is living. They are:
1. Sheer egoism. Desire to seem clever, to be talked about, to be
remembered after death, to get your own back on grown-ups who
snubbed you in childhood, etc. etc. It is humbug to pretend that this
is not a motive, a strong one. Writers share this characteristic with scientists, artists, politicians, lawyers, soldiers, successful businessmen—
in short, with the whole top crust of humanity. The great mass of
human beings are not acutely selfish. After the age of about thirty they
abandon individual ambition—in many cases, indeed, they almost
abandon the sense of being individuals at all—and live chiefly for others, or are simply smothered under drudgery. But there is also the minority of gifted, wilful people who are determined to live their own
lives to the end, and writers belong in this class. Serious writers, I
should say, are on the whole more vain and self-centered than journalists, though less interested in money.
2. Aesthetic enthusiasm. Perception of beauty in the external
world, or, on the other hand, in words and their right arrangement.
Pleasure in the impact of one sound on another, in the firmness of
good prose or the rhythm of a good story. Desire to share an experience which one feels is valuable and ought not to be missed. The aesthetic motive is very feeble in a lot of writers, but even a pamphleteer
or a writer of textbooks will have pet words and phrases which appeal
to him for non-utilitarian reasons; or he may feel strongly about typography, width of margins, etc. Above the level of a railway guide,
no book is quite free from aesthetic considerations.
3. Historical impulse. Desire to see things as they are, to find out
true facts and store them up for the use of posterity.
4. Political purpose—using the word “political” in the widest possible sense. Desire to push the world in a certain direction, to alter other
people’s idea of the kind of society that they should strive after. Once
again, no book is genuinely free from political bias. The opinion that
art should have nothing to do with politics is itself a political attitude.
It can be seen how these various impulses must war against one
another, and how they must fluctuate from person to person and from
time to time. By nature—taking your “nature” to be the state you have
attained when you are first adult—I am a person in whom the first
D Orwell • Why I Write d
10 10
three motives would outweigh the fourth. In a peaceful age I might
have written ornate or merely descriptive books, and might have remained almost unaware of my political loyalties. As it is I have been
forced into becoming a sort of pamphleteer. First I spent five years in
an unsuitable profession (the Indian Imperial Police, in Burma), and
then I underwent poverty and the sense of failure. This increased my
natural hatred of authority and made me for the first time fully aware
of the existence of the working classes, and the job in Burma had given
me some understanding of the nature of imperialism: but these experiences were not enough to give me an accurate political orientation.
Then came Hitler, the Spanish civil war, etc. By the end of 1935 I had
still failed to reach a firm decision. I remember a little poem that I
wrote at that date, expressing my dilemma:
A happy vicar I might have been
Two hundred years ago,
To preach upon eternal doom
And watch my walnuts grow;
But born, alas, in an evil time,
I missed that pleasant haven,
For the hair has grown on my upper lip
And the clergy are all clean-shaven.
And later still the times were good,
We were so easy to please,
We rocked our troubled thoughts to sleep
On the bosoms of the trees.
All ignorant we dared to own
The joys we now dissemble;
The greenfinch on the apple bough
Could make my enemies tremble.
But girls’ bellies and apricots,
Roach in a shaded stream.
Horses, ducks in flight at dawn,
All these are a dream.
It is forbidden to dream again;
We maim our joys or hide them;
Horses are made of chromium steel
And little fat men shall ride them.
D Orwell • Why I Write d
I am the worm who never turned,
The eunuch without a harem;
Between the priest and the commissar
I walk like Eugene Aram;
And the commissar is telling my fortune
While the radio plays,
But the priest has promised an Austin Seven.
For Duggie always pays.
I dreamed I dwelt in marble halls,
And woke to find it true;
I wasn’t born for an age like this;
Was Smith? Was Jones? Were you?
The Spanish war and other events in 1936–37 turned the scale and
thereafter I knew where I stood. Every line of serious work that I have
written since 1936 has been written, directly or indirectly, against totalitarianism and for democratic Socialism, as I understand it. It seems
to me nonsense in a period like our own, to think that one can avoid
writing of such subjects. Everyone writes of them in one guise or another. It is simply a question of which side one takes and what approach one follows. And the more one is conscious of one’s political
bias, the more chance one has of acting politically without sacrificing
one’s aesthetic and intellectual integrity.
What I have most wanted to do throughout the past ten years is
to make political writing into an art. My starting point is always a feeling of partisanship, a sense of injustice. When I sit down to write a
book, I do not say to myself, “I am going to produce a work of art.”
I write it because there is some lie that I want to expose, some fact to
which I want to draw attention, and my initial concern is to get a hearing. But I could not do the work of writing a book, or even a long
magazine article, if it were not also an aesthetic experience. Anyone
who cares to examine my work will see that even when it is downright
propaganda it contains much that a full-time politician would consider irrelevant. I am not able, and I do not want, completely to abandon the world-view that I acquired in childhood. So long as I remain
alive and well I shall continue to feel strongly about prose style, to love
the surface of the earth, and to take pleasure in solid objects and scraps
of useless information. It is no use trying to suppress that side of myself. The job is to reconcile my ingrained likes and dislikes with the
D Orwell • Why I Write d
essentially public, non-individual activities that this age forces on all
of us.
It is not easy. It raises problems of construction and language, and
it raises in a new way the problem of truthfulness. Let me give just one
example of the cruder kind of difficulty that arises. My book about
the Spanish civil war, Homage to Catalonia, is, of course, a frankly political book, but in the main it is written with a certain detachment
and regard for form. I did try very hard in it to tell the whole truth
without violating my literary instincts. But among other things it contains a long chapter, full of newspaper quotations and the like, defending the Trotskyists who were accused of plotting with Franco.
Clearly such a chapter, which after a year or two would lose its interest for any ordinary reader, must ruin the book. A critic whom I respect read me a lecture about it. “Why did you put in all that stuff?”
he said. “You’ve turned what might have been a good book into journalism.” What he said was true, but I could not have done otherwise.
I happened to know, what very few people in England have been allowed to know, that innocent men were being falsely accused. If I had
not been angry about that I should never have written the book.
In one form or another this problem comes up again. The problem of language is subtler and would take too long to discuss. I will
only say that of late years I have tried to write less picturesquely and
more exactly. In any case I find that by the time you have perfected
any style of writing, you have always outgrown it. Animal Farm was
the first book in which I tried, with full consciousness of what I was
doing, to fuse political purpose and artistic purpose into one whole. I
have not written a novel for seven years, but I hope to write another
fairly soon. It is bound to be a failure, every book is a failure, but I
know with some clarity what kind of book I want to write.
Looking back through the last page or two, I see that I have made
it appear as though my motives in writing were wholly public-spirited.
I don’t want to leave that as the final impression. All writers are vain,
selfish and lazy, and at the very bottom of their motives there lies a
mystery. Writing a book is a horrible, exhausting struggle, like a long
bout of some painful illness. One would never undertake such a thing
if one were not driven on by some demon whom one can neither resist nor understand. For all one knows that demon is simply the same
instinct that makes a baby squall for attention. And yet it is also true
that one can write nothing readable unless one constantly struggles to
D Orwell • Why I Write d
efface one’s own personality. Good prose is like a window pane. I cannot say with certainty which of my motives are the strongest, but I
know which of them deserve to be followed. And looking back
through my work, I see that it is invariably where I lacked a political
purpose that I wrote lifeless books and was betrayed into purple passages, sentences without meaning, decorative adjectives and humbug
generally.